---
title: 'Distilling Naval Ravikant'
date: '2021-09-17'
path: '/blog/2021/distilling-naval'
tags: ['drafts']
featured: false
excerpt: ''
source: ''
---

- [How to Get Rich: Every Episode](https://nav.al/how-to-get-rich)
- [Naval on Twitter](https://twitter.com/naval/status/1002103360646823936)
- https://thewizdomproject.com/most-important-cognitive-biases/

### Seek Wealth, Not Money or Status

> I would rather be a poor person in a First World country, than be a rich person in Louis the XIV France.

- Wealth is assets that earn while you sleep — it is a positive sum game.
  - Wealth isn't about taking something from somebody else — it's about creating abundance for the world.
- Money is how we transfer wealth.
- Status is your ranking in the social hierarchy — it is a zero sum game.

### Making Money Isn't About Luck

There are two kinds of luck you should be looking for:

1. Luck from preparation — if you are very skilled in a field, you will notice when a lucky break happens in that field.
2. Luck from your unique character — build a unique character, a unique brand, a unique mindset, where then luck finds you.

### You Won't Get Rich Renting Out Your Time

- Renting out your time your inputs are matched to your outputs i.e. not earning while you sleep.
  - You are replaceable (either by somebody else or AI) because you're now doing a set role (which can be taught) and not being creative.
- Own equity to gain your financial freedom where the inputs and outputs are highly disconnected.

### Live Below Your Means for Freedom

- Live far below your means and enjoy a freedom that people busy upgrading their lifestyles just can't fathom.

### Give Society What It Doesn't Know How to Get

> Technology is just the set of things that don't quite work yet. Once something works, it's no longer technology.

- Almost everything that's in your house, in your workplace, and on the street used to be technology at one point in time.
- Entrepreneurship is an act of creating something new from scratch. Predicting that society will want it, and then figuring out how to scale it, and get it to everybody in a profitable way.

### Be The Best At What You Do Through Authenticity, Being You

> Escape competition through authenticity. No one can compete with you on being you.

- The fundamental property of the internet is it connects every human to each other human on the planet.
- Internet means you can find your audience for your product, or your talent, and skill no matter how far away they are.
  - Whatever niche obsession you have, the internet allows you to scale.

### Play Long-term Games With Long-term People

> All the benefits in life come from compound interests.

- In a long-term game, it seems that everybody is making each other rich.
- Beware of moving: every time you reset, every time you wander out of where you built your network, you're going to be starting from scratch.
- Build the kind of reputation that makes people do deals through you. If you're a trusted, reliable, high-integrity, long-term thinking deal maker, people will approach you and give you a cut of the deal just because of the integrity and reputation that you have built up.

### Pick Partners With Intelligence, Energy and Integrity

- You want to find people who seem irrationally ethical: watch out for signals, signals are what people do despite what they say.
- To create things, you have to be a rational optimist.
  - Rational in the sense that you have to see the world for what it really is.
  - Optimistic about your own capabilities, and your capability to get things done.
- We're genetically hardwired to be pessimists. But modern society is far, far safer. There are no tigers wandering around the street.
- The one thing you have to avoid is the risk of ruin.

### Arm Yourself With Specific Knowledge

- If you're later in your 30s you don't get to choose which SK you have. Rather, you get to look at what you have by that point in time, and then you can build on top of it.
- SK can't be trained for it. If you can go to a class and learn SK, then somebody else can be trained for it, too.
- SK is found much more by pursuing your innate talents, your genuine curiosity, and your passion — build SK where you are a natural.
  - It looks like playing a me to me, but it looks like work to others.
  - Take the things you are natural at and combine them so that, just through sheer interest and enjoyment, you end up top 10% at a number of things.
- SK is highly creative or technical.

### Learn to Sell, Learn to Build

- Long term, people who understand the underlying product and how to build it and can sell it, these people can break down walls if they have enough energy, and they can get almost anything done.

### Read What You Love Until You Love to Read

> You should be able to pick up any book in the library and read it.

- The foundation of learning is reading.
- If you understand the basics, especially in mathematics, physics and sciences, then you will not be afraid of any book.

Read foundational things: Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations, Darwin's Origin of the Species, The Eighth Day of Creation, Richard Feynman's Lectures.

### The Foundations Are Math and Logic

> If you're good with computers, basic mathematics, writing, speaking, and if you like reading, you're set for life.

- Focus on the foundations: the ultimate foundation are mathematics and logic.
- Understand the scientific method, then you can understand how to separate truth from falsehood in other fields and other things that you're reading.
- What you are really looking for are algorithms. What you are really looking for is understanding.
- I would say that the five most important skills are: reading, writing, arithmetic, persuasion, (which is talking). Finally, computer programming just because it's an applied form of arithmetic that just gets you so much leverage for free in any domain that you operate in.

### Embrace Accountability to Get Leverage and Equity

> Give me a lever long enough and a place to stand and I will move the Earth.

- Embrace accountability and take risks under your own name. Society will reward you with responsibility, equity, and leverage.
- We're still socially hard wired to not fail in public. The people who have the ability to fail in public under their own names actually gain a lot of power.
- The equity holders take on greater risk, but in exchange, they get nearly unlimited upside. You can do the same with all of your work.
- Always prefer capital and stay out of labor-based leverage. You want the minimum amount of people working with you that are going to allow to use the other forms of leverage.

### Product Leverage

- The most interesting and the most important form of leverage is this idea of products that have no marginal cost of replication.
  - When building a product always look for zero cost of replication and [network effects](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metcalfe%27s_law).
- The robots are already here and there are way more robots than there are humans, it's just that we pack them in data centers for heat and efficiency reasons.
  - Every software developer, now has an army of robots working for him at nighttime.
  - The robot revolution has already happened. We're just adding in much more of the hardware component these days.
- Coding, writing books, recording podcasts, tweeting, YouTubing, are permissionless. You don't need anyone's permission to do them.
- The more of a human element there is in providing that service, the less egalitarian it is.
  - Wearing a Rolex is a zero-sum games — if everybody in the world is wearing a Rolex, then people don't want to wear Rolex anymore because they no longer signal. It's canceled out the effect.
- It's the nature of code and media output that the same product is accessible to everybody.
  - Jeff Bezos doesn't get to watch better movies than we do. He doesn't even have better computing experience. Google doesn't give him some special account where his searches are better.
- You want to use the product that is used by the most people — if you care about ethics in wealth creation, it is better to create your wealth using code and media as leverage because then those products are equally available to everybody as opposed to trying to create your wealth through labor or capital.

### More Goodies On How To Get Rich

- Take no meetings that have no agenda or specific purpose.
- Reject advice — don't read others lottery tickets. Create your own mental models, then read a lot and feel free to discard as you please. Use advice to recall your own knowledge.
- Money buys you the ability of not having to be at a specific place, at a specific time, doing something you do not want to do.
- In a negotiation, the side or one who cares less usually has an advantage.
- When faced with an asymmetry in a negotiation, house renovation, turn short-term games into long-term ones.

## Happiness

Become a philosopher — modern (and ancient) philosophy is occupied with answering the "big" questions in life: how do I become healthy, happy, connected with my community etc.

> Do not pursue pleasure for its own sake

Each pleasure creates its own pain or fear of loss on the other side — in an age of abundance, pursuing pleasure for its own sake creates addiction.

Today — in an age of abundance — pleasure means unlimited access to process food, alcohol, drugs, pornography, news, social media... we are hence desensitized from these pleasures because of its trivial availability.

> Seek peace from mind

Our mind is paranoid and always creating more stress for us than there actually is or should be according to our modern environment.

Peace is happiness at rest, happiness is peace in motion.

The name of God is truth — this means that we should seek "understanding" not wanting to actually change things.
