---
title: 'Physics'
date: '2022-09-12'
path: '/blog/2022/physics'
tags: ['drafts']
featured: false
excerpt: 'Seven Brief Lessons on Physics'
source: 'https://www.amazon.com/dp/b00z8vtmyg/'
---

## The order of time
### Book -> part.3 page.93

3 aspects of things

- Granularity: fundamental granularity of matter and light it exist a limit within the information that exists in a system a limit to distinguishable states in which a system can be, limited by planck ctt measures the scale of this granularity.
- Indeterminacy: the future is not determined by the past. an electron, a quantum of a field, or a photon, does not follow a trajectory in space, but appears in a given place, and given time, when colliding with something else. Where? we don't know. the future is unpredictable. it is all statistically
- Relationalality: it is only in interactions that natures draws the world, relations ground the notion of things. the world of QM is not a world of objects, but a world of events. all events of a system occur in relation to another system.

don't think of the world as a recollection of things, but processes, which are the passage to one interaction to another.
quantum mechanics does not describe objects, but processes and events which are junction points between processes.

fields vs. particles —

### Time log and Moleskine review -> page.48

- Einstein understood that time slows down
  - Higher altitude or slow speed -> time goes faster
  - Low altitude or high speed -> time slows down
We lose the sense of a "now"
Mass slows down time around it

Sadi Carnot: 2nd ppl of thermodynamics: entropy +>0
The only rule or principle that makes a distinction between past and future

Before, hours were longer in the summer than in the winter

Telegraphs + trains => needed sync (patents for train stations)

## 7 Brief lessons

In 1905, Albert Einstein sent three articles to the most prestigious scientific journal of the period, the Annalen der Physik. Each of these is worthy of a Nobel Prize. The first shows that atoms really exist. The second lays the first foundation for quantum mechanics, which I will discuss in the next lesson. The third presents his first theory of relativity (known today as ‘special relativity’), the theory which elucidates how time does not pass identically for everyone: two identical twins find that they are different in age, if one of them has travelled at speed.

in November 1915, he committed to print an article giving the complete solution: a new theory of gravity, which he called ‘The General Theory of Relativity’, his masterpiece and the ‘most beautiful of theories’, according to the great Russian physicist Lev Landau.

What this ‘space’ was made of, this container of the world he invented, Newton could not say. But a few years before the birth of Einstein two great British physicists, Michael Faraday and James Maxwell, had added a key ingredient to Newton’s cold world: the electromagnetic field. This field is a real entity which, diffused everywhere, carries radio waves, fills space, can vibrate and oscillate like the surface of a lake, and ‘transports’ the electrical force.

an extraordinary idea occurred to him, a stroke of pure genius: the gravitational field is not diffused through space; the gravitational field is that space itself. This is the idea of the theory of general relativity. Newton’s ‘space’, through which things move, and the ‘gravitational field’ are one and the same thing.

The sun bends space around itself and the Earth does not turn around it because of a mysterious force but because it is racing directly in a space which inclines, like a marble that rolls in a funnel. There are no mysterious forces generated at the centre of the funnel; it is the curved nature of the walls which causes the marble to roll. Planets circle around the sun, and things fall, because space curves.

The conclusion of Riemann’s thesis was that the properties of a curved space are captured by a particular mathematical object which we know today as Riemann’s curvature, and indicate with the letter ‘R’. Einstein wrote an equation which says that R is equivalent to the energy of matter. That is to say: space curves where there is matter. That is it. The equation fits into half a line, and there is nothing more. A vision – that space curves – became an equation.

Einstein predicted that time passes more quickly high up than below, nearer to the Earth. This was measured and turned out to be the case. If a man who has lived at sea level meets up with his twin who has lived in the mountains, he will find that his sibling is slightly older than him.

When a large star has burnt up all of its combustible substance (hydrogen) it goes out. What remains is no longer supported by the heat of the combustion and collapses under its own weight, to a point where it bends space to such a degree that it plummets into an actual hole. These are the famous ‘black holes’.

The whole of space can expand and contract. Furthermore, Einstein’s equation shows that space cannot stand still; it must be expanding.

To treat energy as if it were made up of finite packages had been, for Planck, a peculiar trick of calculation, and he did not himself fully understand the reason for its effectiveness. It was to be Einstein once again who, five years later, came to understand that the ‘packets of energy’ were real. Einstein showed that light is made of packets: particles of light. Today we call these ‘photons’.

It was Bohr who understood that the energy of electrons in atoms can only take on certain values, like the energy of light, and crucially that electrons can only ‘jump’ between one atomic orbit and another with fixed energies, emitting or absorbing a photon when they jump. These are the famous ‘quantum leaps’.

Heisenberg imagined that electrons do not always exist. They only exist when someone or something watches them, or better, when they are interacting with something else. They materialize in a place, with a calculable probability, when colliding with something else. The ‘quantum leaps’ from one orbit to another are the only means they have of being ‘real’: an electron is a set of jumps from one interaction to another. When nothing disturbs it, it is not in any precise place. It is not in a ‘place’ at all.

It is not possible to predict where an electron will reappear, but only to calculate the probability that it will pop up here or there. The question of probability goes to the heart of physics, where everything had seemed to be regulated by firm laws which were universal and irrevocable.

The nature of these particles, and the way they move, is described by quantum mechanics. These particles do not have a pebble-like reality but are rather the ‘quanta’ of corresponding fields, just as photons are the ‘quanta’ of the electromagnetic field. They are elementary excitations of a moving substratum similar to the field of Faraday and Maxwell.

Quantum mechanics and experiments with particles have taught us that the world is a continuous, restless swarming of things; a continuous coming to light and disappearance of ephemeral entities. A set of vibrations, as in the switched-on hippy world of the 1960s. A world of happenings, not of things.

the Standard Model has never been taken entirely seriously by physicists. It’s a theory which looks, at least at first sight, piecemeal and patched together. It’s made up of various pieces and equations assembled without any clear order. A certain number of fields (but why these, exactly?) interacting between themselves with certain forces (but why these forces?) each determined by certain constants (but why precisely these values?) showing certain symmetries (but again, why these?). We’re far from the simplicity of the equations of general relativity, and of quantum mechanics.

So, for the moment we have to stay with the Standard Model. It may not be very elegant, but it works remarkably well at describing the world around us. And who knows? Perhaps on closer inspection it is not the model that lacks elegance. Perhaps it is we who have not yet learnt to look at it from just the right point of view; one which would reveal its hidden simplicity.

There’s a paradox at the heart of our understanding of the physical world. The twentieth century has given us the two gems of which I have spoken: general relativity and quantum mechanics. From the first cosmology developed, as well as astrophysics, the study of gravitational waves, of black holes, and much else besides. The second provided the foundation for atomic physics, nuclear physics, the physics of elementary particles, the physics of condensed matter, and much, much more. Two theories, profligate in their gifts, which are fundamental to today’s technology and have transformed the way we live. And yet the two theories cannot both be right, at least in their current form, because they contradict each other.

In the morning the world is curved space where everything is continuous; in the afternoon it is a flat space where quanta of energy leap. The paradox is that both theories work remarkably well.

The central result of loop quantum gravity is indeed that space is not continuous, that it is not infinitely divisible but made up of grains or ‘atoms of space’. These are extremely minute: a billion billion times smaller than the smallest atomic nuclei. The theory describes these ‘atoms of space’ in mathematical form, and provides equations which determine their evolution. They are called ‘loops’, or rings, because they are linked to each other, forming a network of relations which weaves the texture of space, like the rings of a finely woven immense chain mail. Where are these quanta of space? Nowhere. They are not in a space because they are themselves the space. Space is created by the linking of these individual quanta of gravity. Once again the world seems to be less about objects than about interactive relationships.

But it’s the second consequence of the theory that is the most extreme. Just as the idea of a continuous space that contains things disappears, so the idea of an elementary and primal ‘time’ flowing regardless of things also vanishes. The equations describing grains of space and matter no longer contain the variable ‘time’. This doesn’t mean that everything is stationary and unchanging. On the contrary, it means that change is ubiquitous – but elementary processes cannot be ordered in a common succession of ‘instants’.

There are only elementary processes wherein quanta of space and matter continually interact with each other.

If the theory of loop quantum gravity is correct, matter cannot really have collapsed to an infinitesimal point, because infinitesimal points do not exist – only finite chunks of space. Collapsing under its own weight, matter must have become increasingly dense, up to the point where quantum mechanics must have exerted a contrary, counterbalancing pressure. This hypothetical final stage in the life of a star, where the quantum fluctuations of space-time balance the weight of matter, is what is known as a ‘Planck star’.

A Planck star is not stable: once compressed to the maximum it rebounds and begins to expand again. This leads to an explosion of the black hole. This process, as seen by a hypothetical observer sitting in the black hole on the Planck star, would be a rebound occurring at great speed. But time does not pass at the same speed for her as for those outside the black hole, for the same reason that in the mountains time passes faster than at sea-level. Except that for her, because of the extreme conditions, the difference in the passage of time is enormous, and what for the observer on the star would seem an extremely rapid bounce would appear, seen from outside it, to take place over a very long time. This is why we observe black holes remaining the same for long periods of time: a black hole is a rebounding star seen in extreme slow motion.

What we find is that when the universe is extremely compressed quantum theory generates a repulsive force, with the result that the great explosion or ‘Big Bang’ may have actually been a ‘Big Bounce’. Our world may have actually been born from a preceding universe which contracted under its own weight until it was squeezed into a tiny space before ‘bouncing’ out and beginning to re-expand, thus becoming the expanding universe which we observe around us.

Our universe may have been born from a bounce in a prior phase, passing through an intermediate phase in which there was neither space nor time.

Why does heat go from hot things to cold things, and not vice versa? It is a crucial question, because it relates to the nature of time. In every case in which heat exchange does not occur, or when the heat exchanged is negligible, we see that the future behaves exactly like the past.

While there is no friction, for instance, a pendulum can swing forever. If we filmed it and ran the film in reverse we would see movement that is completely possible. But if there is friction then the pendulum heats its supports slightly, loses energy and slows down. Friction produces heat. And immediately we are able to distinguish the future (towards which the pendulum slows) from the past.

The difference between past and future only exists when there is heat. The fundamental phenomenon that distinguishes the future from the past is the fact that heat passes from things that are hotter to things that are colder.

why, as time goes by, does heat pass from hot things to cold and not the other way round? The reason was discovered by Boltzmann, and is surprisingly simple: it is sheer chance. Boltzmann’s idea is subtle, and brings into play the idea of probability. Heat does not move from hot things to cold things due to an absolute law: it only does so with a large degree of probability. The reason for this is that it is statistically more probable that a quickly moving atom of the hot substance collides with a cold one and leaves it a little of its energy, rather than vice versa.

As frequently happens, no one took Boltzmann seriously. On 5 September 1906, in Duino near Trieste, he committed suicide by hanging himself, never having witnessed the subsequent universal recognition of the validity of his ideas.

the probability which Boltzmann considered, the probability at the roots of heat, has a different nature, and is independent of quantum mechanics.

the idea that our ignorance implies something about the behaviour of the world seems irrational: the cold teaspoon heats up in hot tea and the balloon flies about when it is released regardless of what I know or don’t know.

The cold teaspoon heats up in hot tea because tea and spoon interact with us through a limited number of variables amongst the innumerable variables which characterize their microstate. The value of these variables is not sufficient to predict future behaviour exactly (witness the balloon), but is sufficient to predict with optimum probability that the spoon will heat up.

in the course of the twentieth century thermodynamics (that is, the science of heat) and statistical mechanics (that is, the science of the probability of different motions) have been extended to electromagnetic and quantum phenomena. Extension to include the gravitational field, however, has proved problematic. How the gravitational field behaves when it heats up is still an unsolved problem.
