---
title: '22.45: notes on China'
date: '2022-11-12'
path: '/blog/2022/45'
tags: ['drafts', 'til']
featured: false
excerpt: ''
---

In the last episode of
To understand the current China tech landscape, it is important to first point out the ~three~ four Chinese giants — also known as [BATX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BATX).

BATX stands for Baidu, Alibaba, Tencent, and Xiaomi, the four biggest tech companies in China. They're often compared to GAMA (Google, Amazon, Meta, and Apple) in the West. BATX were some of the first wave of tech companies started in the 2000s.

So far, the picture looks similar from the one we've seen in the western countries. However, there's a key difference: while GAMA was concerned with preserving the status quo, the BATX took a different approach with upstarts and acted also as the VCs funding the next wave of startups. Hence, the BATX became both the Unicorns and the Sequoias of China.

During the 2010s, BATX invested heavily in the ecosystem and funded the second wave of tech companies (Huawei, ByteDance, DiDi, DJI, Meituan, Pinduoduo, TikTok...) also securing its position along the way. In other words: if you can't beat them, join them.

> Chinese companies are not about "search" or "commerce", their main competence is to make money — no matter how.

Another key difference between Western and Chinese companies is how they perceive and market themselves to the world. For example, everybody knows that Google is mainly about "search" and Meta is about "connecting". One would say that these are their main competences. However, in China, you would say that. BATX core competence is not "search" or "commerce", but to make money — no matter how.

Besides painting a rough outline of the Chinese tech landscape, in these notes I also wanted to focus on social commerce and Pinduoduo.

As it often happens with these tech outliers, its founding story is particularly interesting. PDD was born out of a blend from a startup and gaming studio and a marketplace for the agricultural market.

- Dealing with perishable goods, PDD could navigate around Alibaba's dominance — rendering the giant unable to compete in such vertical.
- Their first version of the product worked on top of WeChat and it was like a real-life Farmville.

"Pin" roughly translates to "doing something together", which is at PDD's core. Their viral loop started with this idea of group buying. In the platform you could buy an item for a certain price, or create (or join) a group and buy it at a great discount.

In the upcoming section we'll cover:

- Group buying — the social factor: to create or join a group you are incentivized to share it with your friends.
- Create or join a group: if you create a group — instead of joining an already created group — the discount is even larger.
- Starting with FMPG products: but soon move up the stack and there are platforms that already "group-buy" iPhones.
- The main target were tier 4 and 5 cities.

Another interesting fact about social commerce dynamics is the shift from search-based buying towards browse-based buying. When the user intent is search (i.e. amazon.com) the incumbent products always show on top and it is difficult to stand out of the crowd. In other words, the brand becomes more relevant when no trusted party is endorsing the product.

However, if the main platform driver becomes social interaction it is easier for a product to get distribution, because the spread mechanism leverages (already made) social connections.

Which leads us to the idea of B2S. Not B2C, not B2B, but B2Supplier. Because the brand is no longer important (the social endorsement is) a no-name brand can sell directly to the consumer.

Finally, the fact that it all started with low-priced, low-valued items, also eliminated the need to get it faster. Buyers were ok with slower shipments — which reduced the platfrom's costs.

---

rural china !== field 4MP in tier 5
Baidu betting the house on electric cards working with gov to upgrade roads

Shein

- 5 days from design to ship
- tech focus mkt
- 100 designs per day
