src/markdown/now/2019-2.md, before:

---
title: 'Mid 2019'
date: '2019-05-01'
---

This Now chapter for Mid 2019 features a brand new Learning section 🤓 that replaces the Training section — seen in the last two chapters. While I don't discard the idea of bringing it back in the future, after [sunsetting the sub3 project](/blog/2019/sunsetting-sub3), I don't feel like enduring a training-related goal this time.

Long story short, the themes for this Now chapter are pansa, books at collado.io, physics and the Feynmann Lectures and a more conscious approach to reading.

## Making

During the lasts months [I couldn't allocate as much time as I wanted](/blog/2019/strong-opinions-loosely-held) to [pansa](/work/pansa). Consequently, [the project has stalled](https://github.com/MarcCollado/pansa). Nonetheless, I want to continue working on it, since I truly believe such a product needs to exist.

Somehow related to pansa and knowledge collection, I will be [revamping the way book summaries are presented at collado.io](/blog/2019/upgrading-books). Writing summaries out of my notes after reading a book is a good habit. I want to make the most out of this content, so readers can benefit from a better experience.

## Learning

Despite I'm actively seeking for novel sources to keep on learning, every year I try to enroll a (more structured) course around a topic I'd like to go deeper. Here are examples from [2016](/blog/2016/ironhack-experience) (WebDev — Rails), [2017](/blog/2018/udacity-dand)(Data analytics) and [2018](/blog/2018/udacity-rdnd)(WebDev — React).

This year, though, "I don't feel like course". Yet there is a topic I want to explore further: physics.

Back in college, I hated physics. Nowadays I find myself devouring books, papers, or [anything I can put my hands on](https://brilliant.org), that speaks physics. Several friends have recommended the [Feynmann Lectures](http://www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu) — I will (re)start my structured physics journey with them.

## Reading

> If you've read a book in a week, you haven't "read it", at all.

This was a friend's reaction when I mentioned I was aiming to read a couple of books per month during Early 2019. Then he went on...

> You don't go cover to cover and call it a day. A book is not a closed entity living in isolation. It contains a mesh of references you ought to explore, endless opportunities to learn beyond the book itself. It should persuade you to discover new ideas, otherwise, you are not truly "reading it".

...and he has a point.

For this reason, during Mid 2019, I will slow down my reading efforts and focus more on "reading" the ones I couldn't handle from Early 2019. Plus I will revisit my all-time favorite [Sapiens](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0062316095/), but embracing this mindful approach, savoring each page 😋

- [The Power of Habit](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B006WAIV6M/)
- [Hooked](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00NW01MKM/)
- [Creative Selection](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B079DVT6VP/)
- [Sapiens](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0062316095/)

Commit message:

Update now content to incorporate Radio Lanza

src/markdown/now/2019-2.md, after:

---
title: 'Mid 2019'
date: '2019-05-01'
---

This Now chapter for Mid 2019 features a brand new Learning section 🤓 that replaces the Training section — seen in the last two chapters. While I don't discard bringing it back, after [sunsetting the sub3 project](/blog/2019/sunsetting-sub3), I don't feel like enduring another a training-related goal this time.

Long story short, the themes for this Now chapter are [Radio Lanza](https://www.radiolanza.com), books at [collado.io](/), the Feynman Lectures, and a more conscious approach to reading.

## Making

[Jimmy Flores](https://www.linkedin.com/in/soyjimmy/) and I just launched a new podcast: [Radio Lanza](https://www.radiolanza.com). You can read the story of how it came to be in the [this post](/blog/2019/radio-lanza) and links to each episode can be found in its own [work page](/work/radio-lanza).

The microphone will certainly become a major area of focus, but I will also be [revamping the way book summaries are presented at collado.io](/blog/2019/upgrading-books). Writing summaries out of my notes after reading a book is a good habit. I want to make the most out of this content, so readers can benefit from a better experience.

## Learning

Despite I'm actively seeking for novel sources to keep on learning, every year I try to enroll a (more structured) course around a topic I'd like to go deeper. Here are examples from [2016](/blog/2016/ironhack-experience) (WebDev — Rails), [2017](/blog/2018/udacity-dand) (Data analytics) and [2018](/blog/2018/udacity-rdnd) (again, WebDev — React).

This year, though, "I don't feel like course". Yet there is a topic I want to explore further: physics.

Back in college, I hated physics. Nowadays I find myself devouring books, papers, or [anything I can put my hands on](https://brilliant.org), that speaks physics. Several friends have recommended the [Feynman Lectures](http://www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu) — I will (re)start my structured physics journey with them.

## Reading

> If you've read a book in a week, you haven't "read it", at all.

This was a friend's reaction when I mentioned I was aiming to read a couple of books per month during Early 2019. Then he went on...

> You don't go cover to cover and call it a day. A book is not a closed entity living in isolation. It contains a mesh of references you ought to explore, endless opportunities to learn beyond the book itself. It should persuade you to discover new ideas, otherwise, you are not truly "reading it".

...and he has a point.

For this reason, during Mid 2019, I will slow down my reading efforts and focus more on "reading" the ones I couldn't handle from Early 2019. Plus I will revisit my all-time favorite [Sapiens](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0062316095/), but embracing this mindful approach, savoring each page 😋

- [The Power of Habit](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B006WAIV6M/)
- [Hooked](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00NW01MKM/)
- [Creative Selection](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B079DVT6VP/)
- [Sapiens](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0062316095/)
