---
title: '23.30: Montaigne, for the rest of us'
date: '2023-07-26'
path: '/blog/2023/30'
tags: ['til', 'philosophy']
featured: false
excerpt: ''
source: ''
language: 'en'
---

Relativism: Montaigne was a proponent of relativism, which contends that points of view have no absolute truth or validity, but rather, they only have relative, subjective value according to differences in perception and consideration.
Skepticism: Montaigne was influenced by ancient skeptics like Pyrrho and Sextus Empiricus. He questioned the possibility of certainty in knowledge, believing that humans can't trust their reasoning because thoughts just occur to us: we don't truly control them.
Tolerance: Montaigne's experiences with different cultures and religions during his travels influenced his thoughts on tolerance. He critiqued the ethnocentric attitude of his time, highlighting that customs differ across various cultures, and no one is superior to the other.
Humanism: He is often described as a humanist, emphasizing individual freedom, the dignity of the individual, and the need for individuals to reach their full potential. He focused on understanding the human character and condition.
Self-exploration: Montaigne viewed his essays as a means of self-exploration. He believed in studying oneself to understand the intricacies of human nature. His famous quote, "What do I know?" highlights his process of thinking and rethinking, questioning and introspection.
Nature and Naturalness: He believed in following nature and was critical of societal constructs that move people away from natural behavior. Montaigne advocated for a return to simplicity and naturalness, away from the artificiality of societal rules and conventions.
Cultural Criticism: He was critical of the cruelty and barbarity he saw in his society, especially in regards to religious wars, which he thought were a complete disregard for the sanctity of life.
