---
title: 'Defying the Laws of the Internet'
date: '2020-10-05'
path: '/blog/2020/distribution-matters'
tags: ['draft', 'gamestry', 'idea', 'ai', 'creators', 'gaming', 'product']
featured: 'false'
excerpt: ''
---

Here's a fact, almost a law: on the Internet, the big gets bigger. It then follows that the longer an incumbent has sustained its growth and dominance over an industry, the more difficult is to challenge its status quo.

Last January, after raising our series A, [we set out to challenge this fundamental principle](/blog/2020/what-gamestry-is-about). We aimed to create a platform that would empower a long tail of creators. A place where an unknown creator — as long as she creates great content — can thrive, build an audience, and turn her passion into a sustainable lifestyle.

We were naively assuming that we could change how the Internet works. However, our thesis was sustained by a set of cornerstone ideas that turned this wishful narrative into an actionable reality.

- To start with, the problem: [gaming creators are struggling on YouTube and other incumbent platforms](/blog/2020/creators-are-struggling). In a nutshell, in order to make money, the "growth at all cost" dynamic driving YouTube forces niche creators towards publishing click-bait content.
- On top of a problem for creators, a reasonable business case can also be made in favor of the industry. What for YouTube has for long remained an ignored and niche market, it is not anymore. [Gaming has earned its place in the world](/blog/2020/empowering-creators) and gamers have become one of the single largest cohorts on Earth.
- Given this reality, it is fair to assume that by leveraging a vertical platform focused solely on gaming, we'll be able to:
  - First, [build unique features and put ourselves in a position to create an unmatchable experience](/blog/2020/attracting-and-retaining-creators) for both the creator and the viewer.
  - Second, recreate an environment where [creators can build audiences](/blog/2020/audience) and profit from small niches; and fans can show appreciation, and feel closer to their idols. Which will ultimately lead to [better monetization mechanisms that will connect them in novel ways](/blog/2020/youtube-wont-work).

While this might sound like a plan, I assume most of you still remain unconvinced because, so far, the plan lacks its key component: the "how". In this post, I'm not going to spell out the specific features that will make it happen. Mainly because the output is still very fragile and lacks the product consistency to be presented.

However, I wanted to outline the broader strokes of the plan to, at least, rough out the path that eventually is going to take us there.

The ultimate goal is to generate enough organic engagement and optimize the user flows within the platform to uplift creators with smaller audiences. The strategy is sustained by two pillars that work in conjunction: growth (to bring a fresh supply of new users at the outset) and product (to ensure those users are presented with the right content and connected to the right creators as soon as possible).

## Growth

- How to grab bigger creators, then ...
- Trickle down the audience
- Uplift small creators

## Product

- Sustainable competitive advantage through technology, product or process
- Discoverability → Categorization
- Rich cards
- Unlocked content (why YT subs do not work) You can't win YouTube at being YouTube
- Explore algorithm
- How to use distribution: instead of creating content in the dark

> > > update paths to /distribution-matters
