---
title: 'Empowering Creators'
date: '2020-04-02'
path: '/blog/2020/empowering-creators'
tags: ['gamestry', 'idea', 'creators', 'gaming', 'product']
featured: 'false'
excerpt: "Peeling a slice from a well-established platform is always hard. Your value prop must be unique and the audience large enough to generate the initial momentum. By aligning the creators' interests with those of the viewer we are building a gaming-focused community."
---

This is the third part of a series about Gamestry. [The first one](/blog/2020/what-gamestry-is-about), focused on Gamestry core idea and values; and [the second](/blog/2020/creators-are-struggling), around the struggles creators face when it comes to monetization and turning their passion into a sustainable lifestyle.

---

In short, at Gamestry, we're creating a unique marketplace where creators and viewers thrive and grow together.

Peeling a vertical from YouTube is always hard. You never know if it'd be large enough to drive monetization; if your platform would generate enough attention to bring new users abroad; and most importantly, if the product will be sticky enough to not just capture, but retain the users.

To begin with, by bringing a niche market together — that includes billions of users who place an emphasis on quality — Gamestry is able to unify the interests of both creators and viewers alike. We've created a sustainable way for creators to earn money, by bringing quality products directly to the perfect community.

But how do we actually go around this issue is a more interesting idea.

Our underlying assumption is that having intel into the gamer activity provides us with crucial data that will ultimately enhance their experience. For example, imagine that after watching a given piece of content, a player's performance has been positively affected.

We can assume that, for example, if a large enough percentage of the players have seen that specific video prior to winning the corresponding game, the content is of high quality. We will then endorse those videos and recommend them to users.

Content always shines for [its ability to resonate with the users' interests](/blog/2020/distribution-matters). However, if your audience is rather a generalist, the stickiness plummets to the lowest common denominator. There is little space for exploring deep, focused, sophisticated ideas in front of a broad audience.

Recommendation engines don't work that way. They are usually powered by exploit algorithms — which will give you more of what you like. A piece of content that has not resonated across a wider audience will have a hard time being shared, hence recommended to more users.

This is [the key difference between horizontal platforms](/blog/2020/youtube-wont-work), such as YouTube; and vertically focused ones, such as Gamestry.

By lifting the content that ends up being the most helpful to users, we're [aligning the creator' and the viewer'](/blog/2017/alignment) interests. When creators get a sense of what videos have been successful in fulfilling their intent — i.e. to help gamers reach their potential in a particular game — they will then be motivated to continue creating the best content possible.

This will create more views of the content and overall, earn more money for the creator. Through this system, we are aligning the creators' interests with those of the viewer. It is a matter of incentives.

But we haven't stopped there, this is just the beginning. By being connected to the game APIs, we not only can evaluate the performance of each video, but also make sure the content you get is attuned to your level; pair and challenge you with other gamers with the same interests; evaluate and refine each step of your learning path... the list of possibilities are endless.

With billions out there wanting to learn how to improve as a video game player, there hasn't been a reliable and trusted platform to go to.

Gamestry is a platform that's ultimately run by gamers for gamers. We understand the needs of our users and our passion for the industry is the foundation for everything we do. This [persistence and curious mindset](/blog/2017/curiosity-trumps-everything), I found, is one of the most powerful drivers for any idea to move upmarket from its earliest stage.

I truly believe we are into something. The team we've assembled has both insights and shared global knowledge, so we are able to offer gaming and learning-oriented features that are not available on any other platform.

These put us ahead of the game and has been a springboard for our rapid growth to date — as an essential tool for gamer interaction, learning, sharing, and player-improvement.
