---
title: 'Book: Creative Selection'
date: '2021-05-01'
path: '/blog/2021/creative-selection'
tags: ['books', 'design', 'product', 'psychology']
featured: false
excerpt: "Inside Apple's Design Process During the Golden Age of Steve Jobs"
source: 'https://www.amazon.com/dp/1529004713/'
---

> A small group of people built a work culture based on applying the seven essential elements through an ongoing process of creative selection.

**The demo is the self-selecting process (32 to 37).**

- Demo often and open your work to open, honest, and specific feedback.
- Brainstorming is overrated and usually a waste of time.

**"Signing in the Rain": what Richard did with the Konqueror code from KDE (60 to 66).**

- Maximize impact and minimize distractions by identifying the important - passable - ignorable.
- Understand what's important and double down on those.
- Then spent no time or altogether "fake" the details that won't add value at the end.

**1% inspiration, 99% perspiration (83 to 87).**

- Ideas are nothing without the hard work to make them real.
- Once something works, we take it for granted. Take the web browser or the lightbulb.

**The Page Load Test** (**4: One Simple Rule).**

- Focus on a single KPI and improve it on each iteration.
- No feature would merge if it decreased the PLT — no exceptions.
- Turn this routine into a culture.

**Lift as you climb (5: The Hardest Problem).**

- People matter more than programming, or anything else.
- Manage through example and involvement with the product's team.
- Think of Rush drivers' room when Hunt won over the situation through peer support.

**_Taste is developing a refined sense of judgment and finding the balance that produces a pleasing and integrated whole (183)._**

- Developing taste: to go beyond the simple "I like it", you must develop the judgment of a "refined-like" response. Evaluating actively and finding the self-confidence to form opinions with your gut that you can also justify with your head.
- Finding balance: search for equilibrium, making the correct choices. On one side, the refined-like response is often a local determination made early in the design process. A single decision made in isolation. Then, once these granular decisions have been incorporated into the whole larger system, they no longer stand-alone. The small-scale contributions must also contribute to a scheme larger than themselves — attempting to create a pleasant and integrated whole.
- This entire cycle removed the arbitrariness from the taste. It gave taste a purpose, a rationale beyond self-indulgence, an empathetic end.

**The intersection between technology and liberal arts.**

- Creative selection: two sides of the same coin — make use of recurrent demos to balance out heuristics (subjective) and algorithms (objective).
- The seven essential of the Apple development approach:
  - Inspiration: thinking big ideas and imagining what might be possible.
  - Collaboration: working together with other people and seeking to combine complementary skills.
  - Craft: applying skills to achieve high-quality results and always striving to do better.
  - Diligence: enduring the hard work and never resorting to shortcuts.
  - Decisiveness: making tough decisions and refusing to delay or procrastinate.
  - Taste: developing a refined sense of judgment and finding the balance that produces a pleasing and integrated whole.
  - Empathy: see the world from other people's perspectives.
