---
title: 'Version 19.07'
date: '2019-07-31'
excerpt: "The very first edition of the release notes, the page that tells you what's changed ✨"
---

### New Features

- Release notes: this section is "the" new feature in itself. Updated by the end of each month, it aims to summarize "what's new" at [collado.io](#).
- Radio Lanza episode feed: the entire show notes collection of Radio Lanza is now available in [its own work page](/work/radio-lanza).
- Embedded web player at the top of each Radio Lanza episode: [share or listen to an episode right from the show notes page](/work/radio-lanza/episodes/0) — without being redirected to Apple Podcasts or Simplecast.

### New Content

Blog posts:

- Book: [How to Win Friends and Influence People](/blog/2019/how-to-win-friends-and-influence-people)
- [Leapfrogging The Phone](/blog/2019/leapfrogging-the-phone)

[Radio Lanza](/work/radio-lanza) episodes:

- Episodio 5: [Creciendo con nuestros usuarios](/work/radio-lanza/episodes/5)
- Episodio 6: [La importancia de contar historias](/work/radio-lanza/episodes/6)
- Especial: [Menos es más](/work/radio-lanza/episodes/especial-menos-es-mas)
- Episodio 7: [Trabajar con amigos o familiares](/work/radio-lanza/episodes/7)

### Enhancements

- [Old nows](/now) are rendered as a feed of cards at the end of the page instead of being presented as inline content. That layout created an undesirable amount of scroll as "new nows" were being added, now looks cleaner.
- Add offline support through [gatsby-plugin-offline](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/master/packages/gatsby-plugin-offline): drop-in support for making a Gatsby site work offline and more resistant to bad network connections. It creates a service worker for the site and loads the service worker into the client.
- Strava is back in the footer: as an intermittent runner, sometimes I run a lot, sometimes I don't run at all. Now it seems I'm on my way to run a lot again. Strava deserves to be back.
- Deprecate [Netlify CMS](https://github.com/netlify/netlify-cms): the idea of having a CMS to publish content sounds like a no-brainer. Yet if you get along with the text editor, for a personal blog, I realized, it does not make much sense.
- Deprecate [Google Analytics](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/master/packages/gatsby-plugin-google-analytics): having it there in the first place was was a mistake in itself. This website exists as a way to share my thoughts and ideas, not because it wants to amass more users. Now [collado.io](/) is eating its own dog food. Now is tracking-free.
