---
title: 'Notes on... TikTok (the product)'
date: '2020-10-23'
path: '/notes/2020/tiktok-the-product'
tags: ['product']
---

## TikTok's background

The history got started with Musical.ly — which in turn, originally launched in China as an education social network app for short-form videos. The app pivoted and became popular in the United States market. Mostly among teenagers that started using the app for creating and sharing lip-sync covers.

Later ByteDance cloned the idea in China with an app called Douyin. Which became more popular than its American competitor — and ended up buying it. Under ByteDance's ownership, Musical.ly got rebranded as TikTok.

## The algorithm

TikTok is not your typical western social network. Its approach looks more like YouTube, rather than Facebook. However, it can be considered a true mobile-first, user-generated platform.

Its algorithm is not based (and by extension not limited by) on who you follow or who your friends are. Instead of being "friend-dependent", the app learns from as you mindlessly scroll and engage — no need to "search", "friend", or "share".

Any AI researcher, would agree that TikTok's algorithm has no special "sauce". What makes TikTok special is the ability to combine its algorithm with the data on which it is being trained.

There is not much data available about user preferences, but TikTok's algorithm is able to quickly create it and act on it.

The algorithm excels at incentivizing the user to create its own training data through a closed loop. Unlike other social networks, TikTok is presenting one video at a time — and learning from it. It is tracking each interaction with each video, which gives an unambiguous data point to nurture the algorithm.

TikTok helps its algorithm (through human-assisted tagging and user feedback) ["see" the video](https://www.eugenewei.com/blog/2020/9/18/seeing-like-an-algorithm).

Social graph vs. algorithm driven networks: old social networks are path-dependent on your friends and fail to quickly iterate and refine recommendations as your tastes evolve.

## The creator

TikTok makes, what used to be pro workflows, very accessible and easy to use. Things like effects, editing music... are effortlessly available to creators. A lot of people asks why YouTube hasn't already tackled this opportunity. This is something [we are quite familiar at Gamestry](/blog/2020/creators-are-struggling). YouTube has become so vast that it can't create vertical experiences that fit each use case on the platform.

Network effects on creativity: how each creator makes others more creative.

- Bypassing the blank canvas: start by remixing others' ideas, make duets, re-use other videos as "components".
- Distribution: instead of creating content "in the dark", know how to be promoted through featured challenges or trending hashtags.
