---
title: 'Notes on The Shallows'
date: '2021-07-12'
path: '/blog/2021/the-shallows'
tags: ['health', 'privacy', 'psychology']
featured: 'false'
excerpt: 'My inability to focus attracted me to this book, which turned out to be a natural extension of Amusing Ourselves to Death. It revealed that unlike before when we get immersed in any activity we no longer focus for long anymore.'
seo: ''
source: 'https://www.amazon.com/dp/0393339750/'
---

ℹ️ This post has become an unexpected part II of [Amusing Ourselves to Death](/blog/2021/amusing-ourselves-to-death) by Neil Postman. Here the author dissects the very same topic as Postman did, but with the added benefit of having lived through the Internet era.

Despite having been written more than three decades ago, the core idea captured in [Amusing Ourselves to Death](/blog/2021/amusing-ourselves-to-death) remains astonishingly relevant. Although his historical views ended up at the adage of television, it closely describes our current state of affairs. Presumably, at the time of its publication, it might have been perceived as an overstatement, yet with the benefit of hindsight, it has fallen short of dystopia.

Along these lines, I recently stumbled upon [The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0393339750/) by Nicholas Carr. His book can be considered a legitimate extension of Postman's words.

These are some scattered notes I took from the book, plus additional thoughts of mine inserted here and there.

Carr makes a similar case, that every information technology carries an intellectual ethic ― a set of assumptions about the nature of knowledge and intelligence. Similarly, he also explains how the printed book served to focus our attention, promoting deep and creative thought. Yet in stark contrast, the Internet encouraged the rapid, distracted sampling of small bits of information from many sources.

As the very excerpt of the book depicts, is that the Internet's ethic has become that of an industrialist, an ethic of speed and efficiency, of optimized production and consumption. This is to say that, as a society, the Internet is remaking us in its image. We are becoming ever more adept at scanning and skimming, but what we are losing is our capacity for concentration, contemplation, and reflection.

The actions and habits we partake in the real world can make actual physical changes to our psyche. Our brains, the historical and scientific evidence reveals, change in response to our experiences. Hence the technologies we use to find, store and share information can reroute our neural pathways.

---

It was [my inability to focus](/blog/2019/attention-deprived) which originally attracted me to The Shallows. The book revealed that I'm not alone. Unlike before, when we get immersed in a book and focus on it entirely, we no longer focus for long anymore. The Internet not only has dramatically shortened our attention spans but got us addicted in ways we didn't see coming.

For most of us who transitioned from an "analog youth" to a "digital adulthood", we are now able to focus less and get distracted more easily. The Internet has changed our brains in terms of adaptation. Continually surfing the web gets us to like it more, regardless of how much you must have hated it from the start — it never stops.

Our brain now lives in a permanent state of distraction. For our ancestors, maximum concentration and focus were required for reading. This is why reading helped humans develop the productivity of their brains massively.

One of the reasons mentioned in Amusing Ourselves to Death to justify the printed word domination was its lack of competition. The printed matter was virtually all that was available. However, nowadays it is the Internet that enjoys this domination since it has been embedded in almost any aspect of our life.

This ubiquity is only worsened by its highly addictive nature. The level of interactivity people experience is continuously engaging our reward system, making us very aware and conscious of our social status. On top of that, the Internet has a way of capturing our attention, and not stopping there; it will divide the attention to various dimensions so that we'll be interested in a lot of things.
