---
title: '📖 Sapiens'
date: '2021-09-09'
path: '/blog/2021/sapiens'
tags: ['books']
featured: 'false'
excerpt: 'A Brief History of Humankind'
seo: ''
source: 'https://www.amazon.com/dp/0062316117/'
---

## 6M — Last common grandmother of humans

We are members of a large and particularly noisy family called the great apes. 6M years ago, a single female ape had two daughters. One became the ancestor of all chimpanzees, the other is our own grandmother.

Families > Genera > Spices

- Spices: share same DNA pool.
- Genus — Genera: spices that evolved from a common ancestor.
- Families: trace back their lineage back to a founding patriarch.
  - i.e. Genus species: Panthera leo, Homo sapiens...

## 2.5M — Genus Homo

Much like modern humans, evolves from an earlier genus of Apes calles Australopithecus, they spread:
_ Europe and western Asia — Homo neanderthalensis.
_ East Asia — Homo erectus. \* Up to 6 different Homo genus — all of them human.

## Keep in mind

- For countless generations they did not stand out from the myriad other organisms with which they shared their habitats.
- From about 2M years ago until around 10K years ago, the world was home to several human species.
- 400K years ago, hunt large game on a regular basis.
- 300K years ago, generalized use of fire → cooking.
- 200K years ago, Homo Sapiens evolves in East Africa.
- 100K years ago, man jumped to the top of the food chain.

## 70K — Cognitive Revolution: Homo Sapiens form cultures.

The sum of cultures becomes history and brings along new ways of thinking and communicating. **History declares its independence from Biology.**

- Invention of boats, oil lamps, bows and arrows and needles.
- Evidence for religion, commerce and social stratification.
- Fiction, gossip, cooperate together in common myths.
  - Ability to transmit information about things that do not exist at all.
  - Gossip helped Homo sapiens to form larger and more stable bands (150).

> There are no gods in the universe, no nations, no money, no human rights, no laws, and no justice outside the common imagination of human beings.

## 45K — First fishing villages

Size of the average Sapiens brain has actually decreased since the age of foraging: the human collective knows far more today than did the ancient bands. But at the individual level, ancient foragers were the most knowledgeable and skillful people in history.

> When agriculture and industry came along people could increasingly rely on the skills of others for survival, and new ‘niches for imbeciles’ were opened up. You could survive and pass your unremarkable genes to the next generation by working as a water carrier or an assembly-line worker.

Long before the Industrial Revolution, Homo sapiens held the record among all organisms for driving the most plant and animal species to their extinctions. **We have the dubious distinction of being the deadliest species in the annals of biology.**

- 45k years ago we colonized Australia. No other animal had ever moved into such a huge variety of radically different habitats so quickly, everywhere using virtually the same genes.
- 15k years ago we domesticated the firsts dogs.

## 12K — Agricultural Revolution

The foragers’ secret of success, which protected them from starvation and malnutrition, was their varied diet. **Farmers tend to eat a very limited and unbalanced diet — that lacks some of the vitamins, minerals and other nutritional materials humans need.**

More than 90 percent of the calories that feed humanity come from the handful of plants that our ancestors domesticated between 9500 and 3500 BC. No noteworthy plant or animal has been domesticated in the last 2,000 years.

AR enlarged the sum total of food at the disposal of humankind, but the extra food did not translate into a better diet or more leisure. Rather, it translated into population explosions and pampered elites. **The average farmer worked harder than the average forager, and got a worse diet in return. The Agricultural Revolution was history’s biggest fraud.**

The culprits were a handful of plant species, including wheat, rice and potatoes. These plants domesticated Homo sapiens, rather than vice versa.

> If a species boasts many DNA copies, it is a success, and the species flourishes. From such a perspective, 1,000 copies are always better than a hundred copies. This is the essence of the Agricultural Revolution: the ability to keep more people alive under worse conditions.

**One of history’s few iron laws is that luxuries tend to become necessities and to spawn new obligations.** Once people get used to a certain luxury, they take it for granted. Then they begin to count on it. Finally they reach a point where they can’t live without it.

**The story of the luxury trap carries with it an important lesson. Humanity’s search for an easier life released immense forces of change that transformed the world in ways nobody envisioned or wanted.** Nobody plotted the Agricultural Revolution or sought human dependence on cereal cultivation. A series of trivial decisions aimed mostly at filling a few stomachs and gaining a little security had the cumulative effect of forcing ancient foragers to spend their days carrying water buckets under a scorching sun.

> Evolutionary perspective is an incomplete measure of success. It judges everything by the criteria of survival and reproduction, with no regard for individual suffering and happiness.

**Domesticated chickens and cattle may well be an evolutionary success story, but they are also among the most miserable creatures that ever lived.** The discrepancy between evolutionary success and individual suffering is perhaps the most important lesson we can draw from the Agricultural Revolution.

- Disconnection between evolutionary success and well being.
- We developed the idea of attachment to "home" and started accumulating things.
- Separation from neighbors → more self-centred creature.
- We started thinking "of the future".
- We've got 90% of the population working as peasants, **not making history.**

> History is something that very few people have been doing while everyone else was ploughing fields and carrying water buckets.

## An Imagined Order

What people take to be their most personal desires are usually programmed by the imagined order. Let’s consider, for example, the popular desire to take a holiday abroad. There is nothing natural or obvious about this. **A chimpanzee alpha male would never think of using his power in order to go on holiday into the territory of a neighbouring chimpanzee band.**

Like the elite of ancient Egypt, most people in most cultures dedicate their lives to building pyramids. Only the names, shapes and sizes of these pyramids change from one culture to the other.

Between the years 3500 BC and 3000 BC Sumerians invented 'writing'.

Biological distinctions between different groups of Homo sapiens are, in fact, negligible, thus biology can’t explain the intricacies of racial dynamics.

Different societies adopt different kinds of imagined hierarchies: race, caste... but one hierarchy has been of supreme importance in all known human societies: the hierarchy of gender.

> ‘Biology enables, Culture forbids’: Biology is willing to tolerate a very wide spectrum of possibilities. It’s culture that obliges people to realise some possibilities while forbidding others.

## Part Three: The Unification of Humankind

Culture = Cognitive dissonance (engine for growth). Don't look to another culture expecting a pristine set of values.

162 <> 246

## Part Four: The Scientific Revolution

At 05:29:45 on 16 July 1945. At that precise second, American scientists detonated the first atomic bomb at Alamogordo, New Mexico. **From that point onward, humankind had the capability not only to change the course of history, but to end it.**

> Modern science is based on the Latin injunction ignoramus – ‘we do not know’. It assumes that we don’t know everything. Even more critically, it accepts that the things that we think we know could be proven wrong as we gain more knowledge.

The Napoleonic military machine that crushed the armies of the European powers at Austerlitz (1805) was armed with more or less the same weaponry that the army of Louis XVI had used.

**A-Mortal**: Gilgamesh failed in his quest. He returned home empty-handed, as mortal as ever, but with one new piece of wisdom. When the gods created man, Gilgamesh had learned, they set death as man’s inevitable destiny, and man must learn to live with it. Disciples of progress do not share this defeatist attitude. For men of science, death is not an inevitable destiny, but merely a technical problem. And every technical problem has a technical solution.

**Science is unable to set its own priorities**. It is also incapable of determining what to do with its discoveries. For example, from a purely scientific viewpoint it is unclear what we should do with our increasing understanding of genetics.

**Scientific research can flourish only in alliance with some religion or ideology**. The ideology justifies the costs of the research. In exchange, the ideology influences the scientific agenda and determines what to do with the discoveries.

## Colonization

The discovery of an effective treatment for scurvy greatly contributed to British control of the world’s oceans and its ability to send armies to the other side of the world.

The Scientific Revolution and modern imperialism were inseparable. People such as Captain James Cook and the botanist Joseph Banks could hardly distinguish science from empire.

**Europe domination**: in 1775 Europe was an economic dwarf, but between 1500 and 1750, western Europe gained momentum and became master of the ‘Outer World’, meaning the two American continents and the oceans. By 1900 Europeans firmly controlled the world’s economy and most of its territory.

> The Chinese and Persians did not lack technological inventions such as steam engines (which could be freely copied or bought). They lacked the values, myths, judicial apparatus and sociopolitical structures that took centuries to form and mature in the West and which could not be copied and internalised rapidly.

Previous seekers of empire tended to assume that they already understood the world. European imperialists set out to distant shores in the hope of obtaining new knowledge along with new territories.

**For most of history the economy stayed much the same size.** Per capita production remained static. But all that changed in the modern age.

307

## Random Data and Ideas

- In Homo sapiens, the brain accounts for about 2–3 per cent of total body weight, but it consumes 25 per cent of the body’s energy when the body is at rest.
- Women who gave birth earlier fared better and lived to have more children. Natural selection consequently favoured earlier births. And, indeed, compared to other animals, humans are born prematurely, when many of their vital systems are still under-developed.
- Dual reality: the objective reality of rivers, trees and lions; and the imagined reality of gods, nations and corporations.
- Today people believe in equality, so it’s fashionable for rich kids to wear jeans, which were originally working-class attire. In the Middle Ages people believed in class divisions, so no young nobleman would have worn a peasant’s smock.
- Francis Bacon connected the fields of science and technology.
- Gunpowder was invented accidentally, by Daoist alchemists searching for the elixir of life.
- In 1950 western Europe and the United States together accounted for more than half of global production, whereas China’s portion had been reduced to 5 per cent.
