---
title: 'A framework to master the world'
date: '2021-10-21'
path: '/blog/2021/learning-framework'
tags: ['idea', 'education', 'productivity']
featured: 'false'
excerpt: "When it comes to learning new things, sometimes it can be difficult to assess where to direct our attention. Because of this, I've developed a simple framework to approach learning timelessly."
seo: ''
source: ''
---

The framework I use to learn new things, and personal development, in general, is something that has always been on my mind. However, I've never taken the time to verbalize or articulate it.

Having a strategy when it comes to learning is useful because there is too much to learn. Nowadays, the corpus of available information is overwheling and almost infinite. On top of that, if your curious mind tends to wander, readily seduced by the allure of trying something new — instead of doubling down on an already acquired skill with the potential to compound over time — this framework might come in handy.

When it comes to learning, starting from scratch seems always easier. The beginner's mind is rewarding in two ways.

- First, the appeal of discovering something you knew nothing about.
- Second, is the quick ramp-up you get when starting from scratch — similar to the gains you get the first weeks at the gym.

It is the path of least resistance, but one that quickly fades away. Also probably the reason why [generalists and restless minds](/blog/2020/generalists) tend to jump between learning new things without a clear agenda or goal in mind.

Unlike a topic you've already mastered — in which the rewards of additional units of efforts tend to generate smaller deltas of knowledge — a novel topic will give you a fresh start and a "zero to one" feeling that creates the illusion of faux progress.

Because of this, sometimes it can be difficult to assess where to direct our learning attention without falling victim of this trap. Here's precisely where the framework might be useful.

Beyond those specific and narrow skills that might help you move in one clear vector of your career or personal life, I found a way to approach learning in a more timeless fashion.

Long story short, to "master the world" one needs to have develop a deep understanding of how both things and humans work — also the former having both a micro and a macro lens. It goes like this:

- How people work:
  - 🔬 The micro lens — or how humans behave: this includes topics such as psychology, finance (micro economics), or statistics and biases...
  - 🔭 The macro — or how societies function: this includes topics such as arts, macro economics, history, philosphy, or politics...
- ⚙️ Then on the flipside, there's how things work^1: this includes topics such as physics, math, or technology...

The former revolves around how persons behave, both within groups and individually. The latter is about the rules of nature and stuff we invent, both on a the macro and a micro level.

## How people behave

First, understand how humans work, again, both on a macro and a micro level. Since we behave differently when on our own than in groups, at the human (micro) level you do this by learning [psychology](https://medium.com/@yegg/mental-models-i-find-repeatedly-useful-936f1cc405d); and at a societal (macro) level you do this by learning the history.

The branch will be supported by a few complementary disciplines like [philosophy](https://www.susanrigetti.com/philosophy), economics, or statistics. It is nice to study them as well, however, they should be approached as a supporting function, not as the root path.

## How things work

Second, understand how the world and things work, both on a macro and a micro level. You do this, for example, by learning [physics](https://www.susanrigetti.com/physics), from quantum mechanics up to the gravitational theories.

This branch will also feature a few supporting disciplines, such as [math](https://www.susanrigetti.com/math), algebra, or calculus. Again, it is nice to study them as well, however, I'd use them only to advance faster and better understand physics.

## (Bonus) Interpersonal skills

Last but not least, I found what I call interpersonal skills a useful tool to navigate society. These include, but are not limited to, a wide range of disciplines such as writing, public speaking, negotiation, empathy... Scott Adams has an entire repertoire in his book [How to Fail at Almost Everything and Still Win Big](/blog/2020/win-big).

^1:
