---
title: 'Distilling Yuval Noah Harari'
date: '2021-03-20'
path: '/blog/2021/distilling-yuval-noah-harari'
tags: ['podcasts', 'ai', 'philosophy', 'psychology']
featured: 'false'
excerpt: ''
seo: ''
source: 'https://podcasts.apple.com/il/podcast/yuval-noah-harari-getting-interviewed/id1505257174'
---

> Any system that demands perfection, won't work.

- Adapt — we don't know which skill will be useful in 10 years.
- Know thyself — for the first time, algorithms could potentially know us better than ourselves.
    - Know you better, through meditation for example.
    - This was not a problem in the XV century, because an external agent could not know more than we did about ourselves — no matter how little we did know. Today, however, an algorithm can potentially know us better than we do.
    - We trust algorithms to tell us what to watch next, who to be friends with, which mode of transport to pick, what music to listen to...
    - The tipping point for algorithm-driven products won't come when these products make perfect decisions, rather when they make just better decisions than we do. The bar is not high.
    - For the first time, the combination of biology, data, and computing power makes it possible.
    - Desire vs. truth — we fool ourselves and say we want something yet do the opposite.
- A society built on top of incompatible ideas rooted into the 18th century — assumptions like "the customer is always right" or "voters know best".
    - Free will — human choices are not this sacred arena that can't be hacked. This has never been true, and before nobody had the technology to hack human beings at scale. Nowadays, corporations — sitting on top of a vast corpus of data — can predict and manipulate our will.
    - We invented these illusions we all agree upon: money, nations, religion... they are not bad per se. They are "good" if they serve us and have a positive outcome, but we have to discard them the moment we become their slaves.

> The best way to unite people is to find a common enemy.

- For the first time we face the problem of becoming irrelevant — which is worse than slavery. Because under slavery, you still required somebody to do the work. But irrelevant means you are no longer needed.
    - Maybe philosophers will become much valuable than engineers.
- 💡 Scary idea: ubiquitous AI that monitors everything and creates a real-time profile of you that can be used as a resume, grades for education...
    - This can even be magnified with COVID and classes taken over Zoom.
- Problems Yuval thinks are relevant: nuclear warfare, technological disruption (AI), climate change.
    - They need global solutions, there is no way we can solve this problem but in a global scope.
- UBI has a problem with the 'U' and with the 'B', the I is fine.
- For major impact, join an organization — fifty people working together towards a single goal will have way more impact than fifty scattered individuals.