---
title: 'Making It Easier'
date: '2020-04-19'
path: '/blog/2020/making-it-easier'
tags: ['gamestry', 'idea', 'creators', 'gaming', 'product']
featured: 'false'
excerpt: ''
---

TikTok is a fascinating product, as well as a [source of inspiration](/blog/2020/notes-tiktok) of mine, that has mastered the relation between creation and distribution of its content. On the creator side, it is making what we used to think as pro workflows accessible and easy to use. On the distribution, it is [enabling its algorithm](/blog/2020/distribution-matters) through both human-assisted tagging and direct user feedback.

In this post I want to focus on the former.

The fact that TikTok has attracted many creators to its platform is not fortuitous. This trend is partly driven by its ability to democratize pro niches and making them approachable to the _rest of us_. Features reserved to the most sophisticated power users, such as complicated video effects or audio editing, are now effortlessly available to _the average Joe_.

This "simple" twist to the editing toolkit makes all the difference. It doesn't only foster content creation, but unlocks network effects on creativity. Or in other words, the addition of an additional creator spurs inspiration across the board, by making others even more innovative and resourcefulness.

Since [creators are struggling](/blog/2020/creators-are-struggling) to find a place in the Internet that connects them to their audience, a lot of people has asked why [YouTube hasn't tackled this opportunity](/blog/2020/youtube-wont-work). However, YouTube has become so vast that its priorities aren't set by niches anymore. Its product is embracing an unimaginably broad array of realities, which prevents them from optimizing vertical experiences that fit each use case on the platform.

The cause of this ossification turns them into the default choice for most creators — since most eyeballs end up there. On the bright side, though, it presents an opportunity for emerging platforms to exploit nascent, _small_ niches with massive upside that are still irrelevant for them to tackle.

At the end of the day, the cornerstone of any platform success revolves around the creators. It remains a two sided marketplace, however, bring the top notch creators abroad and eyeballs will inevitably follow.

Hence it is reasonable to assume that the platform with the most attractive proposal for creators will reap massive rewards in terms of both acquisition and retention of their audiences.

Then the "billion" dollar question: how do you attract, but most important, retain creators?

I don't have the secret sauce to solve this quandary. However, overtime I have learnt a few lessons here and there that might serve as the starting point to lead the way. The nut we are trying to crack here is the clichéd question that has been endlessly asked in the business world, but one that acquires an especial dimension amongst creators: how do you differentiate, protect, and make your venture unique — or what's the feature of yours that nobody can replicate.

When it comes to creator tools, there are four buckets any platform interested in retaining creators should have an eye on. It is rare for any product to tackle the four at once, however, a combination of two or three can make all the difference.

1. Sucking the oxygen out of the room — i.e. Uber entering a new city. This expression has been popularized by many startups when trying to capture a new market armed with plenty of VC ready money to burned. Resources that will be used to monopolize the market by absorbing the cost of running operations at a lost to spur acquisition. This would be similar to attracting new creators by the virtue of paying them more than other platforms would, a risky move that can't be performed over time. But if done right, it can potentially clean the room and do away with more established competitors.
2. Producing your own content — i.e. Netflix. This strategy has proven very successful to dominate the streaming wars. And while it works for mediums such as TV shows or podcasts, it hasn't worked for the gaming industry. Gamers value more abundance over quality and they are quite sensitive to the timing of the content. Game Of Thrones is as relevant today as it was five years ago. A stream about FIFA 2016 might not be as useful for somebody seeking to improve at the game. Under these conditions, it is safe to assume that user-generated content will reign over gaming.
3. Specific features (or creator tools) where a piece of content only "makes sense" within the platform — i.e. TikTok remixes, or Spotify with the ability to insert music within your podcast (useful for commenting songs or reviewing new releases). Such features are difficult to unlock, but also reward with plenty of upside when it comes to retention. Since the content can only be created and consumed in the platform, it creates a product moat that keeps the creators inside your walls. The feature in itself becomes necessary to produce the content in the first place.
4. Create a culture — i.e. [Twitch emotes](https://www.polygon.com/2018/5/14/17335670/twitch-emotes-meaning-list-kappa-monkas-omegalul-pepe-trihard). If the last one was already a difficult beast to tackle, wait for this one. If done right, this will protect and set your platform much further apart than any of the aforementioned points would. Previously, we've been talking about specific features, pushed from the product teams, that enable something unique that wouldn't be possible in other platforms. However, culture works from the outside-in: the product team "harvests" the necessary conditions and the community is the one in charge to make it grow. Think of Kappa. Kappa is not a product nor a feature. It is someone. But its meaning transcends the person. It is something the community understands and only makes sense given that context. It can't be replicated, for the most, because nobody build it in the first place — it just happened.

I'm sure there are many more levers one could pull to acquire and retain creators to your platform. These, though, are the ones we've been playing with at Gamestry and the ones I feel more comfortable sharing. Looking back at them, I haven't written them in an unordered fashion, however, they now seem to follow a pattern that increases in complexity.
