---
title: '#39: Weekly Update'
date: '2020-09-27'
path: '/notes/2020/39'
tags: ['til']
---

## Found on the "news"

This week I found nothing on the news. Basically because I don't read the news — which reminds me that, in fact, this section is kind of pointless. Thinking of removing it for the upcoming versions.

## Things I've shared

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Timeless:<br>Science, math, philosophy, rhetoric. First principles. Creating art &amp; business. Family &amp; lifelong friends. Habits to calm mind &amp; body.<br><br>Temporary:<br>Politics, news, entertainment. Memorizing facts. Hourly work. Transactional relationships. Drugs &amp; doctors for mind &amp; body.</p>&mdash; Naval (@naval) <a href="https://twitter.com/naval/status/1156875235028635648?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">August 1, 2019</a></blockquote>

- The [playbook](/blog/2019/how-to-win-friends-and-influence-people) has always taught us that you make another person like you by asking about their interests, praising them... However, Chuck Palahniuk, the author of [Fight Club](/blog/2020/fight-club), goes even beyond. He proposes this idea of messing up with people — deliberately making you look dumber, by stating a wrong fact, for example — and giving them a chance to correct you. The act of "correcting you" makes them feel better and more at ease with you. Source: [The Time Ferriss Show](https://tim.blog/2020/09/02/chuck-palahniuk/)
- Having beautiful, inspiring things around is a delightful feeling. [This brand is the pinnacle of this idea](https://kinto-usa.com) — but beware, if you're easy on the "buy button" this website can potentially evaporate your savings.

## Things I was into

> How are you complicit in recreating the very conditions you say you don't want.

—— Jerry Colonna

- The way Carl Jung used the idea of [Metanoia](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metanoia_(psychology)>). I've always thought of the term as clarity of vision, a way to unlock and achieve your human potential. Jung's approach is even more interesting — he developed the usage to indicate a spontaneous attempt of the psyche to heal itself from conflict and being reborn in a more adaptive form.
- Never thought that archaeological records could be susceptible to bias. However, since a great deal of archaeology is state-sponsored, it usually ends up as a narcissistic exercise in self-portraiture. In other words, the way archaeological evidence is gathered, tends to leave systematic holes in our knowledge. Source: [Devon Zuegel](https://devonzuegel.com/post/book-review-against-the-grain-by-james-c-scott)

## Random thoughts

- 5️⃣ Romans did plenty of things right. However, their numeral system was not among their greatest hits. As a kid, you learn the numbers by ascending order: first, the 1, then, the 2... you get the gist. But because of the subtractive notation in the Roman numeral system, if you wanted to understand 4 (IV), you first needed to know about five (V), which if you think about it, doesn't make much sense.
- 🎧 [Huet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pierre_Daniel_Huet), who was deemed the most read person in his day, had a servant follow him with a book to read aloud during meals and breaks — one could argue that the guy somehow pioneered Audible but 500 years ago.
