---
title: '📖 Why We Get Fat'
date: '2021-11-13'
path: '/blog/2021/why-we-get-fat'
tags: ['drafts', 'books']
featured: 'false'
excerpt: 'And What to Do About It'
seo: ''
source: 'https://www.amazon.com/dp/0307474259/'
---

It never ceases to surprise me how little we know about nutrition. Something as ubiquitous and unavoidable — it is a fact of life that we all need food to survive — and still, how little we seem to understand its inner mechanics.

Nutrition has become myth, cult, and dogma more than science. That's precisely what makes it so difficult to even discuss about it. And that's precisely why I like Gary Taubes' scientific approach to nutrition.

## Conventional wisdom

We are causal-seeking machines. We demand immediate, direct explanations to all events happening around us. The easier the evidence and the more compelling the narrative, the better. If it also fits with our existing believes, the best. The problem is that when media, lobbies, and governmental interests get in the way, these explanations can depart from reality.

We've grown being told that we remain lean because we’re virtuous and we get fat because we lack self-control. That we are the only ones to blame. That obesity is only caused by overeating and fat makes us fat. That nutrition can be solely explained by the first law of thermodynamics — reducing an extremely complex to a simple "calories-in, calories-out" story.

While there are some bits of truth here and there, the oversimplification of the argument makes us draw the wrong conclusions.

## Cause and effect, reversed
