---
title: '📖 Super Thinking'
date: '2021-10-06'
path: '/blog/2021/super-thinking'
tags: ['drafts', 'books']
featured: 'false'
excerpt: 'The Big Book of Mental Models'
seo: ''
source: 'https://www.amazon.com/dp/0525533583/'
---

## Being Wrong Less

- Inverse thinking: think of problems from an "inverse" perspective to unlock new solutions.
- Unforced error: mistakes made by our poor judgement.
- Antifragile: beyond resilience, resists the shock and gets better.

### KISS

- Arguing from first principles: avoid conventional wisdom.
  - De-risk: validate and test your principles with assumptions.
  - Use an MVP to test your hypothesis and also avoid premature optimization.
- Ockham's razor: the simplest explanation is most likely to be true.
  - Conjunction fallacy: we tend to think that something specific is more probable than something general — i.e. Linda is a bank teller that also...
  - Overfitting: explaining data with too many assumptions.
- Frame of reference: you see everything from your perspective.
- Availability bias: you see "only" the information made available to you — i.e. relying too much on recent events.
  - Framing: manipulation of how to present information in a given situation. Modulate your discourse according to the recipients frame.
  - Anchors: relying too much on first impressions — i.e. The Economist subscription.
  - Nudging — i.e. the highlight on the restaurant menu.
  - On the Internet these biases can result in filter bubbles. And if you put many of them together and you get an echo chamber.
