---
title: 'Outlive'
date: '2023-12-03'
path: '/blog/2023/outlive/'
tags: ['book', 'health']
featured: false
excerpt: ''
source: ''
---

## Healthspan and the Horsemen

> Tithonus, a hapless mythical Greek, asked the gods for eternal life. But because he forgot to ask for eternal youth as well, his body continued to decay.

Longevity has two components:

- Lifespan: how long you live.
- Healthspan: how well you live — the quality of your years, what Tithonus forgot to ask for.

In 1900, life expectancy hovered around age 50, and most people were likely to die from "fast" causes: accidents, injuries, and infectious diseases... Since then, slow death has supplanted fast death. Nowadays we can expect to die somewhere in our 70s or 80s, give or take, and almost all from "slow" causes.

The odds are overwhelming that you will die as a result of one of the chronic diseases of aging, the Four Horsemen: heart disease, cancer, neurodegenerative disease, or type 2 diabetes and related metabolic dysfunction.

Each of the Horsemen is intricately complex, more of a disease process than an acute illness like a common cold. This is actually good news. Each one of the Horsemen is cumulative, the product of multiple risk factors adding up and compounding over time. Many of these same individual risk factors, it turns out, are relatively easy to reduce or even eliminate.

We've made scant progress against the Horsemen: if you subtract out deaths from the 8 top infectious diseases, which were largely brought under control by the advent of antibiotics in the 1930s, overall mortality rates declined relatively little over the course of the 20th century.

### Medicine 3.0

We have an amazing ability to save lives and restore full function to broken bodies, even reviving patients who were nearly dead. But we are markedly less successful at helping our patients with chronic conditions.

We are intervening at the wrong point in time, well after the disease has taken hold, and often when it’s already too late. We had wasted a lot of time. We need to step in sooner to try to stop or prevent the Horsemen altogether.

None of our treatments for late-stage lung cancer has reduced mortality by nearly as much as the worldwide reduction in smoking that has occurred over the last two decades, thanks in part to widespread smoking bans. This simple preventive measure has saved more lives than any late-stage intervention that medicine has devised.

| Medicine 2.0 is reactive                                    | Medicine 3.0 is proactive                                                       |
| ----------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Emphasis on treatment, remove tumors and hope for the best. | Emphasis on prevent the tumors from appearing and spreading in the first place. |
| Steps in only when something is acutely wrong.              | Tactics must become interwoven into our daily lives.                            |
| Focuses on lifespan.                                        | Focuses on maintaining healthspan.                                              |
| Treats everyone as the same.                                | Considers the patient as a unique individual.                                   |
| Patients take a passive role.                               | Demands patients to be active: well informed, and willing to change habits.     |
| Tactics: procedures and medications.                        | Tactics: exercise, nutrition, sleep, emotional health, and exogenous molecules. |

Medicine 3.0 looks at the situation through a longer lens. A 40 year-old should be concerned with her 40-year cardiovascular risk profile, not merely her 10-year risk. We therefore need tools with a much longer reach than relatively brief clinical trials.

### Risks and financial incentives

Healthspan doesn’t really fit into the business model of our current healthcare system.

Health insurance companies won’t pay a doctor to tell a patient to change the way he eats, or to monitor blood glucose levels in order to help prevent from developing type 2 diabetes. Yet insurance will pay for this same patient’s (very expensive) insulin after he has been diagnosed.

There’s no billing code for putting a patient on a comprehensive exercise program designed to maintain her muscle mass and sense of balance while building her resistance to injury. But if she falls and breaks her hip, then her surgery and physical therapy will be covered. Nearly all the money flows to treatment rather than prevention.

### Objective → Strategy → Tactics

> Strategy without tactics is the slowest route to victory. Tactics without strategy is the noise before defeat.

—— Sun Tzu

I ask all my patients to sketch out an alternative future for themselves. What do you want to be doing in your later decades? What is your plan for the rest of your life?

Tactics are what you do when you are actually in the ring. The strategy is the harder part, because it requires careful study of one’s opponent, identifying his strengths and weaknesses, and figuring out how to use both to your advantage, well before actually stepping in the ring.

Living longer means delaying death from all four of the Horsemen. The very process of aging itself is what makes us vulnerable to these diseases. Time is definitely not on our side.

The Horsemen do have one powerful risk factor in common, and that is age. As you grow older, the risk grows exponentially that one or more of these diseases has begun to take hold in your body. Entropy is working on us every single day.

Without an understanding of the strategy, you’ll forever ride the merry-go-round of fad diets and trendy workouts and miracle supplements.

### Vectors of deterioration

- Cognitive decline.
- Decline and eventual loss of function of our physical body.
- Emotional health. Unlike the others, this one is largely independent of age.

Exercise (strength, stability, aerobic efficiency, and peak aerobic capacity) is the most potent longevity "drug" in our arsenal, in terms of lifespan and healthspan. Exercise not only delays actual death but also prevents both cognitive and physical decline, better than any other intervention.

### Sources 3.0

- Studies of centenarians. These are the extreme outliers, the tiny sliver of the population who have outlived our usual life expectancy by two decades or more.
- Lifespan data from animal models, such as laboratory mice.
- Mendelian randomization. MR helps bridge the gap between randomized controlled trials, which can establish causality, and pure epidemiology, which often cannot.

On Wall Street, gaining an advantage like this is called alpha, and we’re going to borrow the idea and apply it to health. I propose that with some unorthodox but very reasonable lifestyle changes, you can minimize the most serious threats to your lifespan and healthspan and achieve your own measure of longevity alpha.

## Centenarians

> Jeanne Calment rode her bicycle until she was 100 and kept smoking until the age of 117. She died 5 years later at 122, making her the oldest person ever to have lived.

- As of 2021, there were just under 100.000 centenarians in the United States.
- The over-100 age group represents only about 0.03 percent of the population — 1 out of every 3.333 of us.
- Supercentenarians, those who live beyond their 110th birthday, represent the world’s smallest age group, with only about 300 members worldwide at any given time. For every supercentenarian, there are about 9 billionaires.

Genes may be responsible for only about 20 to 30 percent of the overall variation in human lifespan. The catch is that the older you get, the more genes start to matter. Being the sister of a centenarian makes you 8 times more likely to reach that age yourself, while brothers of centenarians are 17 times as likely to celebrate their 100th birthday.

This is why it is important to know when your relatives died and why: what are your likely "icebergs" genetically speaking?

Can we, through our behaviors, somehow reap the same benefits that centenarians get for "free" via their genes? Or to put it more technically, can we mimic the centenarians’ phenotype, the physical traits that enable them to resist disease and survive for so long, even if we lack their genotype?

Centenarians not only live longer, but these are people who have been healthier than their peers, and biologically younger than them, for virtually their entire lives.

Despite these individuals appeared to have very little in common with one another genetically, we can still identify specific genes that give centenarians their edge, and perhaps we can reverse-engineer their phenotype, their effect.

Evolution doesn’t really care if we live that long. Natural selection has endowed us with genes that work beautifully to help us develop, reproduce, and then raise our offspring. After that, natural selection loses much of its force. Genes that prove unfavorable in midlife and beyond are not discarded because they have already been passed down.

To pick one obvious example: the gene responsible for baldness. When we are young, our hair is full and glorious, helping us attract mates. But natural selection does not really care whether in our fifties we have a full head of hair.

💡 Antagonistic pleiotropy: the same genes that may have conferred some sort of advantage earlier in life, can turn out to be dangerous later on.

Despite there is no such thing as a "perfect" centenarian genome, a handful of potential longevity genes have emerged in various studies.

- ✔️ APOE is related to cholesterol metabolism, glucose metabolism—and Alzheimer’s disease risk. It has three variants: e3 (most common), e2 (seems to protect against dementia), and e4 (seems to multiply one’s risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease by a factor of between 2 and 12).
- ✔️ CETP and APOC3 are also correlated with extreme longevity and may explain why centenarians rarely die from heart disease.
- ✔️ FOXO3 regulates how other genes are activated. Its responsibilities include cellular repair tasks, regulating metabolism, caring for stem cells, and various other kinds of housekeeping, including helping with disposal of cellular waste.

While your genotype is immutable, gene expression (phenotype) can be influenced by your environment and your behaviors.

We have to slow or stop diseases before they start. We must focus on delaying the onset rather than extending the duration of disease. Our goal is to live longer without disease.

## Caloric restriction

Rapamycin acts on an intracellular protein complex called mTOR for "mechanistic target of rapamycin". It also seems to reduce systemic inflammation, perhaps by tamping down the activity of so-called senescent cells, which are "older" cells that have stopped dividing but have not died.

The job of mTOR is basically to balance an organism’s need to grow and reproduce against the availability of nutrients. When food is plentiful, mTOR is activated and the cell goes into growth mode, producing new proteins and undergoing cell division, as with the ultimate goal of reproduction. When nutrients are scarce, mTOR is suppressed and cells go into a kind of "recycling" mode, breaking down cellular components and generally cleaning house. Cell division and growth slow down or stop, and reproduction is put on hold to allow the organism to conserve energy.

There was something good about turning down mTOR, at least temporarily and rapamycin may have potential as a longevity-enhancing drug.

The less they feed the animals, the longer they live. Hunger effects seem to be dose dependent, up to a point, almost like a drug.

Reducing the amount of nutrients available to a cell seems to trigger a group of innate pathways that enhance the cell’s stress resistance and metabolic efficiency — all of them related, in some way, to mTOR.

When AMPK senses low levels of nutrients, it activates, triggering a cascade of actions. While this typically happens as a response to lack of nutrients, AMPK is also activated when we exercise, responding to the transient drop in nutrient levels.

Restricting the amount of nutrients that are available, via dietary restriction or exercise, triggers the production of newer, more efficient mitochondria to replace old and damaged ones.

AMPK works to inhibit the activity of mTOR, the cellular growth regulator, and with it all the anabolic growth processes that mTOR controls. Instead of making new proteins and undergoing cell division, the cell goes into a more fuel-efficient and stress-resistant mode, activating an important cellular recycling process called autophagy.

Autophagy represents the catabolic side of metabolism, when the cell stops producing new proteins and instead begins to break down old proteins and other cellular structures into their amino acid components, using the scavenged materials to build new ones. It’s a form of cellular recycling, cleaning out the accumulated junk in the cell.

By cleansing our cells of damaged proteins and other cellular junk, autophagy allows cells to run more cleanly and efficiently and helps make them more resistant to stress. But as we get older, autophagy declines.

From mTOR and rapamycin to caloric restriction, points in one direction: that what we eat and how we metabolize it appear to play an outsize role in longevity.

## Metabolic health

> Not everyone who is obese is metabolically unhealthy, and not everyone who is metabolically unhealthy is obese.

More than 1 in 4 people on this planet have some degree of NASH or its precursor, known as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, or NAFLD.

NAFLD is highly correlated with both obesity and excessive cholesterol, yet it often flies under the radar, especially in its early stages. NAFLD and NASH represent the tip of the iceberg of a global epidemic of metabolic disorders, ranging from insulin resistance to type 2 diabetes.

❗️ The first signs would generally show up only on a blood test for the liver enzyme alanine aminotransferase (ALT). Clinical evaluation is recommended for ALT above 33.

Type 2 diabetes is technically a distinct disease, but I view it as simply the last stop on a railway line passing through several other stations, including hyperinsulinemia, prediabetes, and NAFLD / NASH.

❗️ Metabolic syndrome (or MetSyn) is defined in terms of the following five criteria:

- High blood pressure (>130/85)
- High triglycerides (>150 mg/dL)
- Low HDL cholesterol (<50 mg/dL)
- Central adiposity (waist circumference >38 inches)
- Elevated fasting glucose (>110 mg/dL)

120 million Americans meet 3 or more of these criteria and 90% of the US population ticks at least 1 of these boxes.

Metabolism is the process by which we take in nutrients and break them down for use in the body. In someone who is metabolically healthy, those nutrients are processed and sent to their proper destinations.

## Insulin resistance

> Like cancer, Alzheimer’s, and heart disease, type 2 diabetes is known as a disease of civilization — it has only come to prominence in the modern era. Half of the population is either on the road to type 2 diabetes or already there.

An adult male can typically store a total of about 1.600 calories worth of glycogen, or about enough energy for 2 hours of vigorous endurance exercise.

One of the liver’s many important jobs is to convert this stored glycogen back to glucose and then to release it as needed to maintain glucose homeostasis.

An average adult male will have about 5 grams of glucose circulating in his bloodstream at any given time. These 5 grams won’t last more than a few minutes, as glucose is taken up by the muscles and the brain, so the liver has to continually feed in more to maintain a constant level.

Insulin — a hormone secreted by the pancreas when the body senses the presence of glucose — decides where to store the energy coming from the food we eat.

For a person who is not depleting muscle glycogen rapidly the excess energy will largely end up in fat cells (as triglycerides contained within fat cells). The twist here is that subcutaneous fat, the layer of fat just beneath our skin, is actually the safest place to store excess energy. Fat in and of itself is not bad. It’s where we should put surplus calories. That’s how we evolved. While fat might not be culturally or aesthetically desirable in our modern world, subcutaneous fat actually plays an important role in maintaining metabolic health.

Think of fat as acting like a kind of metabolic buffer zone, absorbing excess energy and storing it safely until it is needed. As long as you haven’t exceeded your own fat storage capacity, things are pretty much fine.

However, when subcutaneous fat capacity is depleted, the surplus begins spilling over into other areas of your body as visceral fat. These fat cells secrete inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-alpha and IL-6, key markers and drivers of inflammation, in close proximity to your most important bodily organs. This may be why visceral fat is linked to increased risk of both cancer and cardiovascular disease.

✔️ This is why I insist my patients undergo a DEXA scan annually — and I am far more interested in their visceral fat than their total body fat.

The canary in the coal mine of metabolic disorder, is elevated insulin. Insulin resistance means that cells, initially muscle cells, have stopped listening to insulin’s signals. The body’s first response to incipient insulin resistance is to produce more insulin.

The simplest explanation is likely that our metabolism, as it has evolved over millennia, is not equipped to cope with our ultramodern diet. Evolution is no longer our friend, because our environment has changed much faster than our genome ever could.

### Fructose and uric acid

Not all calories are metabolized in the same way. Fructose, turns out to be a very powerful driver of metabolic dysfunction if consumed to excess because it is metabolized differently from other sugars.

When we metabolize fructose, along with certain other types of foods, it produces large amounts of uric acid, which has also been associated with elevated blood pressure.

❗️ High uric acid is an early warning sign that we need to address a patient’s metabolic health, their diet, or both.

Because of a random genetic mutation, far back in our evolutionary past, our species had lost the uricase enzyme — and with it, the ability to process uric acid.

However, it seems that this mutation may have been essential to the very emergence of the human species.

These apes moved up North, where food was not abundant, and in order to survive, now needed to be able to store some of the calories they did eat as fat. But storing fat did not come naturally to them because they had evolved in Africa, where food was always available. Thus, their metabolism did not prioritize fat storage. At some point, our primate ancestors underwent a random genetic mutation that effectively switched on their ability to turn fructose into fat: the gene for the uricase enzyme was "silenced," or lost.

## Cardiovascular disease

> What is the most common "symptom" of heart disease? It isn't chest pain, left arm pain, or shortness of breath; it is sudden death.

Half of all major adverse cardiovascular events in men, such as heart attack, stroke, or any procedure involving a stent or a graft, occur before the age of 65.

❗️ The ratio of triglycerides to HDL cholesterol should be less than 1:1.

Heart disease and stroke (ASCVD), represent the leading cause of death, killing an estimated 2.300 people every day in the United States. But while heart disease is the most prevalent age-related condition, it is also more easily prevented than either cancer or Alzheimer’s disease.

If stretched out and laid end to end, our vascular network would wrap around the earth more than twice. Each individual blood vessel is a marvel of material science and engineering, capable of expanding and contracting dozens of times per minute, allowing vital substances to pass through its membranes, and accommodating huge swings in fluid pressure, with minimal fatigue. No material created by man can even come close to matching this.

### Cholesterol

Cholesterol is essential to life. It is required to produce some of the most important structures in the body.

Total cholesterol, the first number that people offer up when we’re talking about heart disease, is only slightly more relevant to your cardiovascular risk than the color of your eyes.

There’s no connection whatsoever between cholesterol in food and cholesterol in blood. In 2015 the advisory committee responsible for the US government dietary guidelines finally conceded that "cholesterol is not a nutrient of concern for overconsumption".

Particles tagged with apoA (HDL) can cross the endothelial barrier easily in both directions, in and out. LDL particles and other particles with the apoB protein are far more prone to getting stuck inside. The trouble starts when LDL particles stick in the arterial wall and subsequently become oxidized.

To gauge the true extent of your risk, we have to know how many of these apoB particles are circulating in your bloodstream. That number is much more relevant than the total quantity of cholesterol that these particles are carrying.

❗️ Three of the major prerequisites for heart disease, none of these is enough to guarantee that someone will develop heart disease, but all three are necessary to develop it.

- Elevated apoB and Lp(a) (far more predictive of cardiovascular disease than simply LDL-C).
- LDL oxidation or modification (leading to the plaques that a calcium scan revealed).
- Evidence of background inflammation, such as elevated levels of C-reactive protein.

Risk is proportional to apoB exposure over time. Our first order of business is to reduce the burden of apoB particles, primarily LDLs but also VLDLs, thus lowering risk, the more the benefits compound over time.

✔️ I tend to push my patients to consume monounsaturated fats, found in high quantities in extra virgin olive oil, macadamia nuts, and avocados. The point is not necessarily to limit fat overall but to shift to fats that promote a better lipid profile.

✔️ Statins inhibit cholesterol synthesis, prompting the liver to increase the expression of LDLR, taking more LDL out of circulation.

## Cancer

cancer is the second leading cause of death in the United States, right behind heart disease. Together, these two conditions account for almost one in every two American deaths.

Like heart disease, cancer is a disease of aging. That is, it becomes exponentially more prevalent with each decade of life,

in 2017 there were more cancer deaths among people between forty-five and sixty-four than from heart disease, liver disease, and stroke combined.

The problem we face is that once cancer is established, we lack highly effective treatments for it. Our toolbox is limited.

Metastatic cancers can be slowed by chemotherapy, but they virtually always come back, often more resistant to treatment than ever.

The second problem is that our ability to detect cancer at an early stage remains very weak. Far too often, we discover tumors only when they cause other symptoms, by which point they are often too locally advanced to be removed—or

Cancer cells are different from normal cells in two important ways. Contrary to popular belief, cancer cells don’t grow faster than their noncancerous counterparts; they just don’t stop growing when they are supposed to. For some reason, they stop listening to the body’s signals that tell them when to grow and when to stop growing.

The second property that defines cancer cells is their ability to travel from one part of the body to a distant site where they should not be. This is called metastasis, and it is what enables a cancerous cell in the breast to spread to the lung. This spreading is what turns a cancer from a local, manageable problem to a fatal, systemic disease.

So not only is breast cancer genetically distinct from colon cancer (as the researchers expected), but no two breast cancer tumors are very much alike.

With a few exceptions, such as glioblastoma or other aggressive brain tumors, as well as certain lung and liver cancers, solid organ tumors typically kill you only when they spread to other organs.

Contrary to popular belief, killing cancer cells is actually pretty easy. I’ve got a dozen potential chemotherapy agents in my garage and under my kitchen sink. Their labels identify them as glass cleaner or drain openers, but they would easily kill cancer cells too. The problem, of course, is that these poisons will also slaughter every normal cell in between, likely killing the patient in the process. The game is won by killing cancers while sparing the normal cells. Selective killing is the key.

modern chemotherapy: It is systemic, but still not specific enough to target only cancerous cells and not normal healthy cells.

In 2011, two leading cancer researchers named Douglas Hanahan and Robert Weinberg identified two key hallmarks of cancer that may lead—and in fact have led—to new treatments, as well as potential methods of reducing cancer risk. The first such hallmark is the fact that many cancer cells have an altered metabolism, consuming huge amounts of glucose. Second, cancer cells seem to have an uncanny ability to evade the immune system, which normally hunts down damaged and dangerous cells—such as cancerous cells—and targets them for destruction. This second problem is the one that Steve Rosenberg and others have been trying to solve for decades.

But these cancer cells weren’t “respiring” the way normal cells do, consuming oxygen and producing lots of ATP, the energy currency of the cell, via the mitochondria. Rather, they appeared to be using a different pathway that cells normally use to produce energy under anaerobic conditions, meaning without sufficient oxygen, such as when we are sprinting. The strange thing was that these cancer cells were resorting to this inefficient metabolic pathway despite having plenty of oxygen available to them.

In normal aerobic respiration, a cell can turn one molecule of glucose into as many as thirty-six units of ATP. But under anaerobic conditions, that same amount of glucose yields only two net units of ATP.

Warburg effect, and even today, one way to locate potential tumors is by injecting the patient with radioactively labeled glucose and then doing a PET scan to see where most of the glucose is migrating. Areas with abnormally high glucose concentrations indicate the possible presence of a tumor.

the Warburg effect generates lots of by-products, such as lactate, a substance that is also produced during intense exercise. In fact, turning glucose into lactate creates so many extra molecules that the authors argued that the relatively small amount of energy it produces may actually be the “by-product.”

In the 1990s and early 2000s, as rates of smoking and smoking-related cancers declined, a new threat emerged to take the place of tobacco smoke. Obesity and type 2 diabetes were snowballing into national and then global epidemics, and they seemed to be driving increased risk for many types of cancers, including esophageal, liver, and pancreatic cancer.

Globally, about 12 to 13 percent of all cancer cases are thought to be attributable to obesity.

Obesity, especially when accompanied by accumulation of visceral fat (and other fat outside of subcutaneous storage depots), helps promote inflammation, as dying fat cells secrete an array of inflammatory cytokines into the circulation

Eating less appears to give them some degree of protection. The same may hold true in people: one study of caloric restriction in humans found that limiting caloric intake directly turns down the PI3K-associated pathway, albeit in muscle

So she worked out a regimen that consisted primarily of leafy vegetables, olive oil, avocados, nuts, and modest amounts of protein, mostly from fish, eggs, and poultry. The diet was just as notable for what it did not contain: added sugar and refined carbohydrates. All along, she underwent frequent blood tests to make sure her insulin and IGF-1 levels stayed low, which they did. Over the next few years, every other woman who was enrolled at her trial site had died.

because cancer cells are so metabolically greedy, they are therefore more vulnerable than normal cells to a reduction in nutrients—or more likely, a reduction in insulin, which activates the PI3K pathway essential to the Warburg effect.

With all diagnostic tests, there is a trade-off between sensitivity, or the ability of the test to detect an existing condition (i.e., its true positive rate, expressed as a percentage), and specificity, which is the ability to determine that someone does not have that condition (i.e., true negative rate). Together, these represent the test’s overall accuracy.

Of all the Horsemen, cancer is probably the hardest to prevent. It is probably also the one where bad luck in various forms plays the greatest role, such as in the form of accumulated somatic mutations. The only modifiable risks that really stand out in the data are smoking, insulin resistance, and obesity (all to be avoided)—and
