---
title: '📖 Awareness'
date: '2019-12-14'
path: '/blog/2019/awareness'
tags: ['books', 'happiness', 'mindfulness', 'minimalism', 'psychology']
featured: 'false'
excerpt: 'Conversations with the Masters'
source: 'https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07YMHHSYJ/'
---

> "God is not attained by a process of addition to anything in the soul, but by a process of subtraction."

## Waking up

> Though everything is a mess, all is well. Strange paradox.

Most people, even though they don't know it, are asleep. They never understand the loveliness and the beauty of this thing that we call human existence. They are having a nightmare.

People don't really want to grow up, people don't really want to change, people don't really want to be happy, people don't really want to be cured. What they want is relief — a cure is painful.

We don't want to look, because if we do, we may change. If you look, you lose control of the life that you are so precariously holding together. And so in order to wake up, the thing you need most is the readiness to learn something new.

It's not that we fear the unknown. You cannot fear something that you do not know. Nobody is afraid of the unknown. What you really fear is the loss of the known. That's what you fear.

## Unlearning to be happy

> It will pass. Everything passes, everything.

Your depressions and your thrills have nothing to do with happiness. Those are the swings of the pendulum. If you seek kicks or thrills, get ready for depression. Do you want your drug? Get ready for the hangover. One end of the pendulum swings to the other.

I'm ready to be happy provided I have this, that, and the other thing. But this is really to say to our friend or to our God or to anyone, "You are my happiness. If I don't get you, I refuse to be happy."

If you want anything too badly, you're in big trouble. You can be happy right now. There's only one reason why you're not experiencing _bliss_ at this present moment, and it's because you're focusing on what you don't have.

Uninterrupted happiness is uncaused. True happiness is uncaused. You cannot make me happy. You are not my happiness. You say to the awakened person, "Why are you happy?" and the awakened person replies, "Why not?"

To acquire happiness you don't have to do anything, because happiness cannot be acquired. Does anybody know why? Because we have it already. How can you acquire what you already have?

Life is easy, life is delightful. It's only hard on your illusions, your ambitions, your greed, your cravings. These things come from having identified with all kinds of labels.

"I" is neither great nor small. "I" is neither successful nor a failure. It is none of these labels. These things come and go. These things depend on the criteria society establishes. These things depend on your conditioning. These things depend on the mood of the person who happens to be talking to you right now. It has nothing to do with "I."

Who determines what it means to be a success? This stupid society. The main preoccupation of society is to keep society sick! They are loony, they're crazy. You became president of the lunatic asylum and you're proud of it even though it means nothing. Having a lot of money or being president of a corporation has nothing to do with being a success in life. You're a success in life when you wake up!

We are crazy. The only reason we're not locked up in an institution is that there are so many of us. We're living on crazy ideas about love, about relationships, about happiness, about joy, about everything. We're crazy to the point, I've come to believe, that if everybody agrees on something, you can be sure it's wrong!

### Change and the idea of new

> Every great idea starts out as a blasphemy.

Every new idea, every great idea, when it first began was in a minority of one. That Jesus Christ—minority of one. The Buddha—minority of one. Everybody was saying something different from what he was saying.

Jesus proclaimed the good news yet he was rejected. Not because it was good, but because it was new. We hate the new. We don't want new things, particularly when they're disturbing, particularly when they involve change.

### Challenging our believes

> All I can do for you is challenge your beliefs and the belief system that makes you unhappy. All I can do for you is help you to unlearn.

Most of what we feel and think we conjure up for ourselves in our heads.

I challenge anyone to think of anything more practical than spirituality as I have defined it — not piety, not devotion, not religion, not worship, but spirituality.

- When you renounce something, you're tied to it.
- When you fight something, you're empowering it.

So you must "receive" your demons, the only way to get out of this is to see through it. Understand its true value and you won't need to renounce it; it will just drop from your hands. But of course, if you're hypnotized into thinking that you won't be happy without this, that, or the other thing, you're stuck.

Agreement and disagreement have to do with words and concepts and theories. They don't have anything to do with truth. Truth is never expressed in words. Truth is sighted suddenly, as a result of a certain attitude.

Are you listening, as most people do, in order to confirm what you already think? That's faith. Not belief, but faith. Your beliefs give you a lot of security, but faith is insecurity.

- The first step, readiness to admit that you don't want to wake up, that you don't want to be happy.
- The second step, readiness to understand, to listen, to challenge your whole belief system.

The only way someone can be of help to you is in challenging your ideas. If you're ready to listen and if you're ready to be challenged, there's one thing that you can do, but no one can help you.

## Selfishness

> The lovely thing about Jesus was that he was so at home with sinners, because he understood that he wasn't one bit better than they were.

We differ from others — from criminals, for example — only in what we do or don't do, not in what we are.

There are three types of selfishness.

- First, when I do something, or rather, when I give myself the pleasure of pleasing myself.
- Second, when I give myself the pleasure of pleasing others. Don't take pride in that. Don't think you're a great person. You're a very ordinary person, but you've got refined tastes.
- Third, which is the worst: when you do something good so that you won't get a bad feeling. It doesn't give you a good feeling to do it; it gives you a bad feeling to do it. You hate it.

Expect the worst, you're dealing with selfish people. They're not nice. They're as bad as you are. They're asleep like you. And what do you think they are going to seek? Their own self-interest, exactly like you.

We love to hurt people, especially some people. We love it. And when someone else is doing the hurting we rejoice in it. But we don't want to do the hurting ourselves because we'll get hurt, others will have a bad opinion of us. They won't like us, they'll talk against us and we don't like that.

Ignorance and fear, ignorance caused by fear, that's where all the evil comes from, that's where your violence comes from.

## Understand, w/o judgment, w/o change

> No judgment, no commentary, no attitude: one simply observes, one studies, one watches, without the desire to change what is.

The trouble with people is that they're busy fixing things they don't even understand. We're always fixing things. It never strikes us that things don't need to be fixed. They need to be understood. If you understood them, they'd change.

Do you want to change the world? How about beginning with yourself? Through observation. Through understanding. With no interference or judgment on your part. Because what you judge you cannot understand.

Most people don't live aware lives. They live mechanical lives, mechanical thoughts — generally somebody else's — mechanical emotions, mechanical actions, mechanical reactions.

If you ever let yourself feel good when people tell you that you're OK, you are preparing yourself to feel bad when they tell you you're not good. As long as you live to fulfill other people's expectations, you better watch what you wear, how you comb your hair, whether your shoes are polished — in short, whether you live up to every damned expectation of theirs. Do you call that human?

Cut out all the OK stuff and the not-OK stuff; cut out all the judgments and simply observe, watch.

It's precisely the ones who don't know what to do with this life who are all hot and bothered about what they are going to do with another life. One sign that you're awakened is that you don't give a damn about what's going to happen in the next life. You're not bothered about it; you don't care. You are not interested, period.

Eternal means timeless — no time. The human mind cannot understand that. The human mind can understand time and can deny time. What is timeless is beyond our comprehension.

### Awareness

> It's like when you throw black paint in the air; the air remains uncontaminated. You never color the air black.

Be aware of what you're saying, be aware of what you're doing, be aware of what you're thinking, be aware of how you're acting. Be aware of where you're coming from, what your motives are. The unaware life is not worth living.

When I'm listening to you, it's infinitely more important for me to listen to me than to listen to you. Otherwise I won't be hearing you. I'll be coming at you from my own conditioning. I'll be reacting to you in all kinds of ways from my insecurities, from my need to manipulate you, from my desire to succeed, from irritations and feelings that I might not be aware of. So it's frightfully important that I listen to me when I'm listening to you.

## Me and I

Practice self-observation: watch everything in you and around you as far as possible and watch it as if it were happening to someone else.

You feel pretty strongly about certain things, and you think it is you who are feeling strongly about them, but are you really? It's going to take a lot of awareness for you to understand that perhaps this thing you call "I" is simply a conglomeration of your past experiences, of your conditioning and programming.

Am I my thoughts, the thoughts that I am thinking? No. Thoughts come and go; I am not my thoughts.

Am I my body? They tell us that millions of cells in our body are changed or are renewed every minute, so that by the end of seven years we don't have a single living cell in our body that was there seven years before. Cells come and go. Cells arise and die. But "I" seems to persist. So am I my body? Evidently not.

The body is part of "I," but a changing part. It keeps moving, it keeps changing. We have the same name for it but it constantly changes. Just as we have the same name for Niagara Falls, but Niagara Falls is constituted by water that is constantly changing. We use the same name for an ever-changing reality.

You've got "I" observing "me." This is an interesting phenomenon that has never ceased to cause wonder to philosophers, mystics, scientists, and psychologists.

We spend so much of our lives reacting to labels. We identify the labels with the "I." When you're caught up in labels, what value do these labels have, as far as the "I" is concerned? Could we say that "I" is none of the labels we attach to it? Labels belong to "me." What constantly changes is "me."

## Love and loneliness

> You are never in love with anyone, you're in love with your prejudiced idea of that person.

Anytime you have a negative feeling toward anyone, you're living in an illusion. There's something seriously wrong with you. You're not seeing reality. Something inside of you has to change. He is not to blame. The world's all right. The one who has to change is you.

We always want someone else to change so that we will feel good. But even if your wife changes or your husband changes, you're just as vulnerable as before; you're just as idiotic as before; you're just as asleep as before.

If you didn't have negative feelings you'd be much more effective. Because when negative feelings come in, you go blind. "Me" steps into the picture, and everything gets fouled up.

Grief is a sign that I made my happiness depend on this thing or person. We're so accustomed to hear the opposite of this that what I say sounds inhuman. To depend on another psychologically — to depend on another emotionally, means to depend on another human being for my happiness.

Perfect love casts out fear. Where there is love there are no demands, no expectations, no dependency. I do not demand that you make me happy; my happiness does not lie in you. If you were to leave me, I will not feel sorry for myself; I enjoy your company immensely, but I do not cling.

> Unless you hate your father and mother, brothers and sisters, unless you renounce and give up everything you possess, you cannot be my disciple.

You must drop it all. When your illusions drop, you're in touch with reality at last, and believe me, you will never again be lonely, never again. Loneliness is not cured by human company. Loneliness is cured by contact with reality.

Think of the loneliness that is yours. Human company will only serve as a distraction. There's an emptiness inside, and when the emptiness surfaces, you run away: turn on the television, turn on the radio, read a book, search for human company, seek entertainment, seek distraction. Everybody does that. It's big business nowadays, an organized industry to distract us and entertain us.

### Addiction

Relating happiness to excitement or thrills is what causes the depression. You're just preparing the way for your next depression. That's not happiness, that's addiction.

Don't look down your nose at the alcoholics and the drug addicts: maybe you're just as addicted as they are. Learn to be alone, with nowhere to rest your head, to leave everyone free and be free yourself, to be special to no one and love everyone — because love does that. It shines on good and bad alike.

- Is it possible for the rose to say, "I will give my fragrance to the good people who smell me, but I will withhold it from the bad"?
- Is it possible for the lamp to say, "I will give my light to the good people in this room, but I will withhold it from the evil people"?
- Is it possible for the tree to say, "I'll give my shade to the good people who rest under me, but I will withhold it from the bad"?

These are images of what love is about.

It's been there all along, staring us in the face in the scriptures, though we never cared to see it because we were so drowned in what our culture calls love with its love songs and poems — that isn't love at all, that's the opposite of love.

## Anxiety, depression, and society

> Reality is not problematic. Problems exist only in the human mind, the stupid, sleeping human mind.

Lots of people have negative feelings they're not aware of. Lots of people are depressed and they're not aware they are depressed.

We spend all our time and energy trying to change external circumstances. But we don't have to change anything. Negative feelings are in you, not in reality. No person on earth has the power to make you unhappy. There is no event on earth that has the power to disturb you or hurt you.

The reason you suffer from your depression and your anxieties is that you identify with them. You say, "I'm depressed." But that is false. You are just experiencing a depression right now.

You are not your depression. That is but a strange kind of trick of the mind, a strange kind of illusion. You have deluded yourself into thinking — though you are not aware of it — that you are your depression, that you are your anxiety, that you are your joy or the thrills that you have.

So when you step out of yourself and observe "me," you no longer identify with "me." Suffering exists in "me," so when you identify "I" with "me," suffering begins.

You have somehow said to yourself that the existence and well-being of 'I' is tied up with this desire. All suffering is caused by my identifying myself with something, whether that something is within me or outside of me.

Observe yourself. After a while you don't have to make any effort, because, as illusions begin to crumble, you begin to know things that cannot be described. It's called happiness. Everything changes and you become addicted to awareness.

> When you're living for nothing, you've got all your skills, you've got all your energy, you're relaxed, you don't care, it doesn't matter whether you win or lose.

Step outside of yourself and look at that depression, don't identify with it. You don't do a thing to make it go away; you are perfectly willing to go on with your life while it passes through you and disappears.

You can be happy in your anxiety. You can be happy in your depression. But you can't have the wrong notion of happiness.

You don't need to belong to anybody or anything or any group. You don't need to be in love. What you need is to be free. What you need is to love. That's your nature. But you want to be desired. You want to be applauded, to be attractive. You don't need this. You can be blissfully happy without it.

Your society is not going to be happy to hear this, because you become terrifying when you open your eyes and understand this. How do you control a person like this? He doesn't need you; he's not threatened by your criticism; he doesn't care what you think of him or what you say about him. He's cut all those strings; he's not a puppet any longer.

---
